+++
title = "Anti-polytheist philosophy"

+++
- Noah's rules: "Non-Jews do not have to become Jews to become righteous. They only have to embrace the Seven Laws of Noah. According to Torah tradition, God gave Noah and his family seven commandments to observe when he saved them from the flood. These commandments, referred to as the Noachide Commandments or Laws, are learned by tradition but also suggested in Genesis Chapter 9, and are as follows: 1. Not to commit idolatry; 2. Not to commit blasphemy; ... 7. To establish courts of justice to punish violators of the other six laws..." ([YT](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5O1ve4Hs4Po))
- More about fanatic intolerant Judaic acts against European polytheism elsewhere.  
- Anti-polytheist actions are specified in Avodah Zarah which clearly specifies efficient idol desecration instructions - "cut off the tip of ear or nose or finger, or batter it".
- Rambam/ Moses Maimonides/ Mūsā bin Maymūn, in his Guide for the Perplexed (dalalat al hai’rin), has a retrospective but telling) explanation for why cows are among the sacrificial animals for yahweh at the temple - it is because cows are venerated by Harrans (dubbed Hindus by some yahUda-s, some deriving Sabian from shiva?), so as to show the yahudas the error of that thought, yahweh has commanded that cows be slaughtered in certain sacrifices at the temple (when it was functioning).
- Defence of prophetism - "From the Stroumsa’s work one can glean at least 12 Mohammedan authors writing polemics against the barAhima-inspired refutation of Islam introduced into their world by al-Rawandi. This continued long after the death of al-Rawandi and well after the army of Islam had erased the Hindus from the Western expanses of Greater India. Importantly, this fear was not restricted to the Mohammedan – interestingly we find similar reactions from the paleo-Abrahamism to the barAhima, with at least 5 polemical Judaic authors taking up their (brAhmaNa) refutation of prophetism, along similar lines to that of the Sunni and the Shia. Much of this mirrors the earlier attack by the pretAcharin-s on the yavana pagans (e.g. Origen apology for the shavamata and his attack on Celsus). " [MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/04/01/5030/)
