---
title: +Academia
---

(Not-so) Unique features of western Indologist approach (Summaries: [Rohana19](https://www.colombotelegraph.com/index.php/speaking-in-gods-tongue-the-grammar-of-sanskrit-scholarship-today/)):

- "Scientific evidence over traditional beliefs " - Stuff like Patanjali of mahAbhAShya being different from patanjali of yogasUtra. And, ability to use IE linguistics tools to interpret veda-s : " a recent project completed in the US – with the involvement of Stephanie Jamison (b. 1948) from UCLA, a big name in the field of Western Sanskrit scholarship – was on translating the Rgveda, oldest Sanskrit text, into English, with the help of Indo-European linguistics rather than slavishly depending on Indian hermeneutics as many Indian scholars did so far. "
- "Desaffronization of texts " - "tend to disregard the religious garb of such texts" (<-- Of course, one wonders why someone who does not really care for Hindu religion or mysticism is in the business of examining Hindu texts. What might be the motivations? Comments in the end.)
- "Texts in context " - "What do we understand by contextualizing the texts? Lineal conflicts and personal attacks that developed into prolonged clashes between the gurukulas, for instance. And the scribal errors purported to be as such but purposely employed devices to alter meaning or variants resulting from the popularity of the text in vernacular traditions. Even beneath an ostentatious eulogy, we may decipher a lamentation if carefully gone against the grain by following the paronomastic hints or “slesharthas“. Some Indian pundits in early modern India, as we get to know now, produced perverted commentaries of Sanskrit texts in order to elude harsh polemics, win patronage, or take revenge on the gurukula such texts belonged to. " (<--- What is he talking about in each sentence here? Of course, mAdhva-Appayya rivalry is an example of the first. But the rest? One also wonders if this "gutter inspector" role is something to be celebrated.)
- Openness to acknowledge forgery: "Roque Mesquita (d. 2016), for example, wrote widely on Madhva’s Unknown Sources and defended Appaya’s views to Dvaita Vedantins’ disappointment, more importantly, by dismantling the saint-like stature of a few doyens of Sanskrit classics and revealing the intellectual forgery disregarded or viewed otherwise for over centuries. " 
- "Sanskrit for Computational Linguistics " - "Their research in the subdomains such as knowledge extraction and knowledge structure identification from resources, text to speech conversion and vice versa, identification of mathematical elements in Sanskrit grammar, and development of tools for analysing and producing Sanskrit texts are literally revolutionizing our existing understanding of Sanskrit including the ways we teach and learn this pleasantly recondite language and associated branches of knowledge. " (<-- That this is a distinctive feature of western Sanskrit scholarship is a misrepresentation.)