---
title: Charity sham
---
## Intro
- Social and medical work was/ is used by the missionaries to prepare the ground for conversion.
- Though Christian propaganda may use the following creed to spread "1. Do good to your neighbours. 2. Forgive your enemies. 3. Spread my message all over.", we have noted that Christianity is far more sinister.

## Mother Teresa, the angel from hell
- Christopher Hitchens [says](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/fighting_words/2003/10/mommie_dearest.html): "MT was not a friend of the poor. She was a friend of poverty. She said that suffering was a gift from God. ... Many more people are poor and sick because of the life of MT: Even more will be poor and sick if her example is followed. She was a fanatic, a fundamentalist, and a fraud, and a church that officially protects those who violate the innocent has given us another clear sign of where it truly stands on moral and ethical questions."
- Regarding the abysmal quality of care for her poor patients, we have plenty of testimony from disillusioned volunteers. \[CH's [documentary shot](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=65JxnUW7Wk4#t=382).\] Mother Teresa herself referred to the facilities as "Houses of the Dying".
    - [Lancet published](http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2894%2991759-0/fulltext) a critical account of the care in Mother Teresa's facilities in 1994. [An academic Canadian study](http://www.nouvelles.umontreal.ca/udem-news/news/20130301-mother-teresa-anything-but-a-saint.html) from a couple of years ago found fault with "her rather dubious way of caring for the sick etc..
- Baptisms of the dying: In a speech at the Scripps Clinic in California in January 1992, she said: "Something very beautiful... not one has died without receiving the special ticket for St. Peter, as we call it. We call baptism ticket for St. Peter. We ask the person, do you want a blessing by which your sins will be forgiven and you receive God? They have never refused. So 29,000 have died in that one house \[in Kalighat\] from the time we began in 1952."
- As a general liar: [here](http://indiafacts.co.in/expose-mother-teresas-deceptions-demagoguery/).

## Rome
- Julian to Arsacius, High-priest of Galatia (362, on his way to Antioch in June?] 
  "The Hellenic religion does not yet prosper as I desire, and it is the fault of those who profess it; for the worship of the gods is on a splendid and magnificent scale, surpassing every prayer and every hope. May Adrasteia pardon my words, for indeed no one, a little while ago, would have ventured even to pray for a change of such a sort or so complete within so short a time. Why, then, do we think that this is enough, why do we not observe that it is their benevolence to strangers, their care for the graves of the dead and the pretended holiness of their lives that have done most to increase atheism? I believe that we ought really and truly to practise every one of these virtues. And it is not enough for you alone to practise them, but so must all the priests in Galatia, without exception. Either shame or persuade them into righteousness or else remove them from their priestly office, if they do not, together with their wives, children and servants, attend the worship of the gods but allow their servants or sons or wives to show impiety towards the gods and honour atheism more than piety. In the second place, admonish them that no priest may enter a theatre or drink in a tavern or control any craft or trade that is base and not respectable. Honour those who obey you, but those who disobey, expel from office. In every city establish frequent hostels in order that strangers may profit by our benevolence: I do not mean for our own people only, but for others also who are in need of money. I have but now made a plan by which you may be well provided for this; for I have given directions that 30,000 modii of corn shall be assigned every year for the whole of Galatia, and 60,000 pints of wine. I order that one-fifth of this be used for the poor who serve the priests, and the remainder be distributed by us to strangers and beggars. For it is disgraceful that, when no Jew ever has to beg, and the impious Galilaeans support not only their own poor but ours as well, all men see that our people lack aid from us. Teach those of the Hellenic faith to contribute to public service of this sort, and the Hellenic villages to offer their first fruits to the gods, and accustom those who love the Hellenic religion to these good works by teaching them that this was our practice of old. At any rate Homer makes Eumaeus say: "Stranger, it is not lawful for me, not even though a baser man than you should come, to dishonour a stranger. For from Zeus come all strangers and beggars. And a gift, though small, is precious.""
