---
title: Tanguts
---

## Early history
- They were of Tibetan ethnicity, with significant Altaic input.
  - "From the Chinese evidence we observe that their predecessors or at least that of the ruling Ngvemi clan of the Tanguts might have originally had links to the Tabgach (Chinese: Tuoba) people with Altaic affinities: they were either early Turks or Mongols or a distinct extinct branch of the Altaic family. "
  - "In their earliest days going back to the 300-400 CE they appear to have had marriage relationships with the para-Mongolic Tuyuhun (Tuguhun) Khaganate and played a role in the formation of this state in between the Tibetans and the Chinese. It was in this period they appear to have associated with the speakers of the Tibeto-Burman language that became the dominant language of the Tanguts." {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/02/15/mongolica-the-tangut-empire/)}
- They were assaulted in 700CE by Tengrida Bilge of the Gök Türks. "Having barely survived this assault they got a chance to enhance their profile when the Blue Turks and the Uighurs were gone or had declined and Tang empire was wracked by natural calamities in the late 800s." {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/02/15/mongolica-the-tangut-empire/)}
- "The Tang emperor fleeing from these attacks called upon the proto-Tangut lord Tuoba Ssu-Kung (880-884 CE) to come to his aid. The Tangut crushed the Huang Chao rebellion in the west between and were rewarded the regions of Inner Mongolia by the Tang and title of “Prince Pacifier of the West”. ... In the 900s when the Tang collapsed the Tangut established themselves as an independent state." {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/02/15/mongolica-the-tangut-empire/)}
- "around 1038 CE Yuanhao declared himself to be cakravartin, superior to all the Han emperors of the past, and his kingdom to be a dharmarājya." {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/02/15/mongolica-the-tangut-empire/)}
- They then fought with Khitan, Chinese Song and Tibetans. 
- "This was followed by a phase of sinophilia among the Tanguts where they established the cult of Confucius and appointed a Chinese commander Ren Dejing who surrendered to them as a high official. With his internal Chinese faction he staged a coup to nearly precipitate a civil war after they threatened to take over the state. He and his Chinese faction were all killed in 1170 and the Tangut empire’s unity was restored." {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/02/15/mongolica-the-tangut-empire/)}
- "Indeed, in 1193 the Jurchen tried to invade them at multiple points along the border but were force to retreat. But in 1205 CE they faced a challenge of the kind they had never faced in their whole existence: Temüjin who was soon to be Chingiz Khan. Those who they thought might be a weaker version of their para-Mongolic cousins the Khitan proved to be something else — within 5 years from first defeat at the hands of the Mongols the mighty Tangut empire was reduced to vassalage followed by its total destruction." {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/02/15/mongolica-the-tangut-empire/)}

## Military might
"By this time the Tangut state came into its own as a well-oiled military machine. Their law stipulated that every able-bodied man from age 15 to 70 was to enlist to serve in the army. Failure to enlist was punished right away with death. Every boy at age 15 was subject to a special medical checkup by state doctors and if found fit was registered in the army. Half were assigned to the reserves and half were placed in the current fighting register. Based on their abilities the men were either placed in the fighting force or in service and logistics or in military engineering. The latter included military manufacture, which produced iron and fashioned cavalry swords (= talvār-s) on a large scale that were reported as being among the best in the world by the contemporary Chinese. The recruits were classified based on the household income: the men from lower income families had to join the army with either one horse or one camel; those with higher income had to join with two horses or two camels. The main fighting force of the Tanguts was a formidable cavalry with each unit placed under a unit commander who was to be protected by his men to death. The best men were drawn into elite forces units known as the “Iron hawks” who conducted special operations and deployed special weapons. They also had a special weapons camel-division, which comprised of mobile stone-throwing machines with a rotating base mounted on camel backs which allowed all-round bombardment. On the theoretical front the Tangut made a close study of the military theories of other civilizations. They made several translations of the Chinese military works like the “The General’s Garden” and the “Art of War”, both of which they appear to have adapted to their needs. The Chinese record the terror of the movement of the Tangut army which they mention as “moving like a tornado this way and that…” " {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/02/15/mongolica-the-tangut-empire/)}

## Indic influence
"As a bauddha cakravartin-s, the Tangut emperors starting from Li Yuanhao showed keen interest in directly studying the bauddha-mata. He initially took the help of Uighur scholars from the Uighur lands he had just conquered to produce printed Tangut-language editions of important mahāyāna texts. Later in his career and during that of the subsequent emperors they got to directly interact with Indian teachers whom they patronized at their court. They created an office known as the Saṃgha office to which they appointed Jayānanda the Indian paṇḍita from Kashmir as the director. They also sent several students to the Pāla and Sena schools to study directly with reputed Indian teachers. These introduced the cult of Mahākāla which started to grow in popularity among the Tanguts. In the Tangut texts we also have the biography of an Indian brāhmaṇa teacher known as Akṣobhyavajra, who is said to have studied both the Veda and the Vajrayāṇa doctrines and completely internalized the bauddha doctrine. He then came to the Tangut kingdom (likely in the 1100s) and stayed at the Huguo temple where he did translation work and taught the nāstika Yoga tantra-s. He instituted a ritual of food-charity among the Tanguts. He is described as a great mantravādin. Another Tangut text on the sādhana of Bhaiṣajyaguru also mentions “a great Indian paṇḍita” as its teacher and the Tanguts following his teaching made several paintings of this deity. " {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/02/15/mongolica-the-tangut-empire/)}

## Religion regulation
The below heavily copies from  {[MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/02/15/mongolica-the-tangut-empire/)}.

"As self-conscious dharma-pāla-s running a dharmarājya, they sought to protect the mata in their realm from vandalism. We get a number of details in this regard from a legal document discovered among the Tangut texts and studied by Kychanov."
- "It states that: “Nobody is allowed to steal, spoil or damage Buddha’s images, temples, images of religious champions, canvases with Confucius’ image or images of gods [i.e. Hindu deva-s and yakṣa-s transmitted as a part of the bauddha system].” Who were these potential vandals against whom this law was laid down? Evidently it was the Mohammedan vandals from the neighboring Qarakhanid kingdom, which was carrying out mass forced conversions of bauddha and shamanistic Turks and sending out missionaries to their neighboring countries. It was also probably a defense against iconoclastic Nestorian Christians who were known to be active in the region."
- "Thus, the Tanguts did probably play some role in keeping the evils of Mohammedanism from spreading east in Asia at that time. In this regard the Khitans, however, played a much bigger role actively crushing mullahs who tried to operate in those regions."
- "It was perhaps this self-perception as dharmapāla-s that made them acutely conscious of the mata being a counter-religion at its heart and the need to prevent competing claimants in the bauddha hierarchy. Already in the days of Li Yuanhao, he made a strong ideological attack on the Tibetans claiming to be bauddha-cakravartin-s. Subsequently, they introduced strict laws to control the propagation of the bauddha-mata in their realm. Among the laws found in the Tangut legal document are those that: 
  - 1. prosecute a preacher for teaching anything that might distort the mata or mislead people or create social unrest. Thus, all preachers of the bauddha-mata had to register with the court and obtain clearance for their sermons before preaching. Failing to do so would result in 3 years of hard physical labor.
  - 2. In a move against the very natural rise of bābāistic tendencies among the nāstika-s, any quack claiming to prognosticate the future or making claims like seeing a divine light from the Buddha was punished similarly. If he did make people follow him and pay him for such claims he was put to death."
- "Other socially disruptive teachings of a lower order received a labor sentence of an year. The state also regulated who became śramaṇa-s and punished misbehaving śramaṇa-s who may engage in unauthorized sexual activities with their female counterparts [We know from bhaṭṭa Jayanta that this was the case in India]."
- "Only those women who were widowed or had no man showing interest in marrying could register to become a bhikṣuṇī. Thus, the religion was not allowed to develop parasitic or depraved tendencies in the Tangut state."
