+++

title = "02 P1 - THE MISSION"

+++

## I. Our World Mission 

Present mental complex – Hindus, the first world thought-givers – The world of conflicts – Theories born to root out nationalism – Failure; Ex: Communism in Russia – Various experiments at synthesis of nations – Failure – The dilemma – Our solution: Inner bond for human unity – Hindus alone equipped for World Mission – The first step. 

Present mental complex – Hindus, the first world thought-givers – The world of conflicts – Theories born to root out nationalism – Failure; Ex: Communism in Russia – Various experiments at synthesis of nations – Failure – The dilemma – Our solution: Inner bond for human unity – Hindus alone equipped for World Mission – The first step. 

Many people in our country hold the view that any venture that we undertake should be based on a grand world-thought capable of rendering good to the whole of humanity eschewing all narrow limitations of the country, community or religion. In support of this view, some proclaim that in this age of missiles and rockets distance has vanished, boundaries of countries have become meaningless and the whole world has shrunk. They, therefore, feel that the very concept of country, nation, etc., has become outdated, that the spirit of world unity alone should inspire all our activities. They conclude that the modern ‘isms’ which have taken up ‘internationalism’ as their watchword can alone lead us to that cherished goal. 

Now, the question that naturally poses itself before us is how far is the task of reorganising the national life of Hindus taken by the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, in conformity with the spirit of world unity and human good? 

The First in the Field 

At the very outset, let it be made clear that it is not the modern thinkers who are the first in the field to think in terms of world unity and universal welfare. Long long ago, in fact, long before the so-called modern age had set in, the seers and savants of this land had delved deep into this vital question. The ideal of human unity, of a world free from all traces of conflict and misery, has stirred our hearts since times immemorial. Our one constant prayer all through the ages has been : 

LkosZ·fi lqf[ku% larq losZ larq fujke;k% 

(Let everyone be happy, let everyone be free from all ills) While the present-day West has not been able to go beyond the motto of ‘the greatest good of the greatest number’, we have never tolerated the idea of a single human being – why, of even a single living 

organism – being miserable. ‘Total good of all beings’ has always been our glorious ideal. 

The Two Sides 

But coming to the plane of the present-day world, we are faced with the hard reality of the all-round discord and disruption ravaging human society. Today, humanity is divided and subdivided into so many small exclusive groups called nations or states, each one of them devoted to its own narrow self-interest. And it is a matter of common experience that wherever there are groups inspired only by self-interest, there is bound to be mutual conflict. Obviously, human unity and welfare is impossible so long as this type of conflict continues. The present state of strifes and wars resulting in human destruction and misery has led many thinkers to conclude that the sentiment of nationalism which nourishes exclusive self-interest is the major obstacle in the way of world unity and human welfare. They, therefore, declare that nationalism should be rooted out from the minds of men all over the world. The Communist ideology which claims internationalism as its sheet- anchor often talks in this strain. 

On the other hand, there is another school of thought, which holds that the roots of nationalism are so deep and long-standing that it is impossible to destroy them. Soviet Russia, which sought to discard nationalism in a bid to take to international communism soon learnt by experience that destruction of this sentiment deprives the people of the incentive for dedicated effort. In the first flush of revolution, material progress was no doubt achieved in Russia in a certain measure. Their first few Seven Year Plans were to an extent successful. But, by and by, the enthusiasm of the people began to wane, their incentive for work began to die away. Eventually, labour in big factories had to be forced to work at the point of bayonet. And again during the Second World War, when Hitler’s tanks were relentlessly pressing forward on the Russian soil, the slogan of ‘Internationalism’ and ‘Communism’ failed to enthuse the Russian people. This served as an eye-opener to the Russian leaders who found it absolutely essential to rouse the dormant patriotic sentiments of the Russian people by invoking their age-old loyalty to motherland and their heroic ancestors. It is evident, therefore, that it is devotion to one’s motherland, society and tradition experienced under the concept of nation that inspires the spirit of real service and sacrifice in the individual. 

The Abortive Experiments 

We can thus conclude that nationalism cannot and should not be destroyed. Then the problem boils down to one of achieving a synthesis of national aspirations and world welfare. Synthesis of various kinds have been, in fact, attempted from time to time in the past. Imperialism has sometimes been claimed to be one such large-scale effort to eliminate conflicts between smaller nations by making them limbs of a single empire. But as it was basically motivated by self-aggrandizement, leading to revolts by the subject nations against their oppression and exploitation, imperialism failed to eliminate international conflicts. 

The League of Nations, formed after the First World War, was also an experiment in avoiding wars and achieving world unity. But within just two decades of its birth, the League of Nations was shattered to pieces on the rock of unbridled national ambitions and consequent conflicts. A more terrible war than all the previous ones besmirched the face of the earth with death and destruction. The UNO too, formed after the Second World War, is faring no better. Our own experience in the case of Kashmir issue tells us that it is incapable of meting out justice, of pulling up the erring members and bringing about an honourable amity among nations. It has been converted into an arena for international conflicts, the powerful nations trying to dominate its forum to further their expansionistic ends. The world is overcast with the dark clouds of a third world war which may, at any time, mean the sudden and total end of the present civilisation itself. 

We thus see that nations are not prepared to come together in a spirit of amity for the welfare of mankind. On the contrary, the national entities are getting more and more exclusive and their ambitions whetted day by day. Newer nations are also coming up on the world stage. The entire face of the world is covered with conflicts between nations. 

In short, nationalism cannot be destroyed; all attempts to harmonise the national ambitions so far have also utterly failed; and the world is on the brink of a nuclear holocaust. Then, which way lies the salvation for humanity? No answer to this challenge seems to be forthcoming. Thinkers, the world over, are on the horns of a dilemma. 

The Inner Bond of Harmony 

However, we Hindus have a solution to offer. But our solution is not based on materialism. All the attempts and experiments made so far were based on theories or ‘isms’ stemming from materialism. And materialism has no answer to the very salient and fundamental question "Why at all should people aspire for world unity and human welfare? Why should they at all feel pained at the sight of man set against man? Why should we at all love each other?" From the materialist point of view we are all gross entities, each separate and exclusive in itself, who can have no bonds of mutual affinity or affection. There can also be no inner restraint in such beings, which can make them control their selfishness from running amuck, in the interest of the humanity as a whole. 

After all, any arrangement evolved for achieving world welfare can be fruitful only to the extent the men behind it are inspired by real love for mankind which will enable them to mould their individual and national conduct in tune with the welfare of humanity. Without that supreme urge, any scheme, however good its purpose may be, will only provide one more alluring mask for the aggrandizement of power-drunk nations. That has been the uniform verdict of history right up to the present times. 

Our ancient Hindu philosophers, therefore, had turned their gaze to a plane higher than materialism. They delved deep into the mysteries of the human soul, well beyond the reach of material science, and discovered the Ultimate Reality, which pervades all Creation, the one great common principle present in all beings, whatever the name we may give it-Soul, God, Truth, Reality or Nothingness. It is the occasional realisation of 

this common entity, that inspires us to strive for the happiness of others. The ‘I’ in me, being the same as the ‘I’ in the other beings, makes me react to the joys and sorrows of my fellow living beings just as I react to my own. This genuine feeling of identity born out of the community of the inner entity is the real driving force behind our natural urge for human unity and brotherhood. Thus it is evident, that world unity and human welfare can be made real, only to the extent mankind realises this common Inner Bond, which alone can subdue the passions and discords stemming from materialism, broaden the horizon of the human mind and harmonise the individual and national aspirations with the welfare of mankind. 

The Right Way 

Now, we come to the second question. How will that One Common Substratum manifest itself in the complicated organism of human society? Will it result in eliminating all distinctive features of nations and roll them all into one uniform pattern ? Or will it make the various groups of people come together in a spirit of comradeship realising the innate oneness of mankind while preserving their individual nationalities? 

Here again, our philosophers have unmistakably pointed out the path of real human happiness. Just as an individual, a nation – an aggregate of individuals – too has an individuality all its own. Individuals and nations in all parts of the globe have distinctive traits and features, each of them having its own place in the scheme of the universe. The different human groups are marching forward, all towards the same goal, each in its own way and in keeping with its own characteristic genius. The destruction of the special characteristics, whether of an individual, or of a group, will therefore not only destroy the natural beauty of harmony but also its joy of self-expression. Evolution of human life also, which is a multifaced one, is retarded thereby. 

For, it is a matter of common experience that it is only by developing one’s unique characteristic that man rises to his full stature and enjoys bliss and happiness. So, to seek harmony among the various characteristics has been our special contribution to the world thought. The oft-quoted feature of our racial genius, that is, of recognising unity amidst diversity, stems from this deep appreciation of the principles that water the roots of human unity, human happiness and evolution. Thus, in short, we stand for a harmonious synthesis among nations and not their obliteration. Needless to say, the idea of creating a stateless condition of levelling all human beings to one particular plane of physical existence, erasing their individual and group traits, is foreign to us. The World State of our concept will, therefore, evolve out of a federation of autonomous and self-constrained nations under a common centre linking them all. 

The Sacred Trust 

It is clear, therefore, that the mission of reorganising the Hindu people on the lines of their unique national genius which the Sangh has taken up is not only a great process of true national regeneration of Bharat but also the inevitable precondition to realise the dream of world unity and human welfare. For, as we have seen, it is the grand world- 

unifying thought of Hindus alone that can supply the abiding basis for human brotherhood, that knowledge of the Inner Spirit which will charge the human mind with sublime urge to toil for the happiness of mankind, while opening out full and free scope for every small life-speciality on the face of the earth to grow to its full stature. 

This knowledge is in the custody of Hindus alone. It is a divine trust, we may say, given to the charge of the Hindus by Destiny. And when a person possesses a treasure, a duty is laid upon him to safeguard it and make it available for the welfare of others. If he fails in that supreme duty he ruins not only himself but also others. Hence the sacred duty of preserving the Hindu Society in sound condition has devolved upon us. 

How can we say that it is the Hindu Society alone that can fulfil this grand world mission and none else? This may at first sight appear to be rather too proud a claim. Nevertheless it is a bare statement of fact, which we can readily appreciate when we observe the historical processes at work in our land as well as in other countries. History has recorded that it is in this land alone that, right from the hoary times, generation after generation of thinkers and philosophers, seers and sages rose to unravel the mysteries of human nature, dived deep into the world of Spirit and discovered and perfected the science of realisation of the Great Unifying Principle. The penance and sacrifice and experience of hundreds of centuries of a whole nation is there as the inexhaustible fountainhead of his knowledge to assuage the spiritual thirst of the world. 

The outside world, on the other hand, did not take to the study of this science of Spirit. Even to this day, they have remained extroverts habituated to studying the outer world through their senses. The senses too go outward and as such they cannot lead to the vision of the inward nature. The Westerners, therefore, have remained ignorant of the knowledge and experience of the world of Spirit however much they might have unravelled the mysteries of the world of matter. Our ancestors who, on the other hand, crossed to realm beyond the senses could see within and have glimpse of that glorious Inner Reality. 

Success in Practice 

Further, it was not mere dry knowledge confined to the intellectual speculations of a few thinkers sitting in their forest hermitages. It was a living thought driving our ancestors – thinkers, administrators, merchants, scientists, artists and philosophers – to reach distant lands carrying that message of world brotherhood. Wherever they stepped, they taught the local people the spiritual and cultural values of life, taught them the sciences of material prosperity as well and built up a homogeneous brotherhood of nations under their benign wings. Our Hindu Society, strong, self-confident and self-effulgent, acted as the fulcrum of that far-flung empire of the Spirit. 

Our arms stretched as far as America on the one side – that was long long before Columbus ‘discovered’ America ! – and on the other side to China, Japan, Cambodia, Malaya, Siam, Indonesia and all the South-East Asian countries and right up to Mongolia and Siberia in the North. Our powerful political empire too spread over these South-East 

areas and continued for 1,400 years, the Shailendra Empire alone flourishing for over 700 years – standing as a powerful bulwark against Chinese expansion. 

During all these centuries, there were neither uprisings by the local people nor their exterminations which would have been the inevitable result if there had been the slightest sign of domination or exploitation by a foreign people and a foreign culture. On the contrary, those people were grateful to us. They adored our nation and longed to give up their mortal coils on the banks of Ganga. That stands in glowing contrast to the bloodstained pages of the history of expansion of Islam, Christianity and now Communism and of the various ‘world conquerors’ produced by other countries. Even to this day, the basic life-pattern of many of those people is Hindu. They bear Hindu names. We find so many Hindu faces all over there, proud of their Hindu heritage, even though many of them are now Muslims by religion. 

Our society which has given rise to such great souls down their centuries – each one of them a lustrous star on the horizon of world thought – is still throwing up a host of luminaries right upto the present-day such as Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, who could identify himself not merely with the joys and sorrows of human beings but with all animate and inanimate objects as well ! When he saw a cow thrashed with a whip, he shrieked with pain and red stripes were found on his back! On another occasion, a bullock grazing on a meadow left a bruised imprint of its hoof on his chest. Such is the extent of identification that our great teachers of the science of Spirit have attained and preached. 

The First Step 

However, today, such a glorious heritage is being condemned and brushed aside by its own children. It has become a fashion these days to deride our ancient ideals and traditions and talk of recasting our society in the mould of the modern ‘isms’. But such attempts at supplanting our life-pattern by another, paying no heed to the natural blossoming of our innate character, can only result in degeneration. Already we are witnessing the signs of its dreadful effect on our society. Disorganised and diffident, our society has become an easy prey to all predatory forces prowling about under the garb of various ‘isms’ and religions. How can a society given to self-derision, weakened by all- round disruption and dissipation, kicked and humiliated at every point by any and every bully in the world, teach the world ? How can one, devoid of the urge or the capacity to ennoble one’s own life, show the path of greatness to others? 

It is inevitable, therefore, that in order to be able to contribute our unique knowledge to mankind, in order to be able to live and strive for the unity and welfare of the world, we stand before the world as a self-confident, resurgent and mighty nation. The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh has resolved to fulfil this age-old national mission by forging, as the first step, the present-day scattered elements of the Hindu Society into an organised and invincible force both on the plane of the Spirit and on the plane of material life. Verily this is the one real practical world mission – if ever there was one. 

## II. Final Refuge for Mankind 

The driving urges of modern societies: "permissiveness" and "competition" – Both lead to social disruption, conflicts, wars-Result: destruction of peace. Ex: Western colonization-"Increasing standard of living" leads man away from happiness-Source of real happiness not in outside objects, but within-The way: Cessation of desires-Highest state. Moksha-‘Chatuvidha Purushartha’ offers the final solution. 

The driving urges of modern societies: "permissiveness" and "competition" – Both lead to social disruption, conflicts, wars-Result: destruction of peace. Ex: Western colonization-"Increasing standard of living" leads man away from happiness-Source of real happiness not in outside objects, but within-The way: Cessation of desires-Highest state. Moksha-‘Chatuvidha Purushartha’ offers the final solution. 

There are some nations in the world, which pride themselves on being "progressive modern societies." It would be instructive to examine how far the dominant note of their life – which is the pursuit of material happiness – is conducive to the real progress and happiness of man. 

The first aspect of this pursuit of pleasure is the process of never ending competition. Each one competes with the other in amassing objects of enjoyment. The second aspect is what is nowadays described as the "permissive society". 

Way to Social Suicide 

We shall start with the second aspect. In simple words, "permissiveness" means, the individual is left free to indulge in whatever way he chooses to enjoy himself. There is no restraint of any kind on him. It is unbridled licentious behaviour with respect to sex, food, drinks, family life, social intercourse and all such aspects. This is also reflected in their talk, writing and thinking as well. Will this type of "permissiveness" be conducive to the real happiness of man? 

The first and foremost effect of this trend would be the destruction of social fabric. The social contract theory on which the Western societies are based cannot stem this tide, because the theory is essentially one of mutual understanding between the individual and the society to protect each other’s interests. But when the individual begins to assert that it is after all a contract between individuals, that basis of social integrity itself falls to the ground. The entity called the "society" will then disrupt and dissipate. And it requires not much of intelligence to guess what kind of fate awaits the pursuit of happiness by the individual where the society has disintegrated. 

It is only when the society is looked upon as a living corporate body of which the individual is a limb that the real unifying social consciousness will be ingrained in him. Then alone will he be able to restrain his erratic impulses and harmonise them with the interests of the society. And this is exactly what the Hindu philosophy propounds. 

Giving Rise to Unhealthy Urge 

The other element of the modern society is "competition". It is claimed that healthy competition is necessary for progress. But it is a matter of common experience that competition will not remain healthy for long. By its very nature it cannot remain healthy. Very soon, it degenerates. Competition, which implies bettering one’s performance over the other, soon gives place to the urge to become better by pulling down the other. These days, such a trend is becoming more and more pronounced even in sports. After all, sports is played for pure joy and for increasing one’s skill and efficiency. It should not matter much, who wins or loses. But we find that even there the atmosphere has no more remained cordial. The craze for winning by any means, fair or foul, and unwholesome rivalry are beginning to vitiate that field. If this could happen in the case of sports, then what to speak of other fields where material interests are directly involved! Now, what is all this competition intended for? It is, according to them, to "raise the standard of living". 

Vicious Race 

Since, their concept of happiness centres entirely round the satisfaction of the desires of senses, the term ‘raising the standards of living" has only come to mean more and more amassing of the objects of physical enjoyment, which becomes the major preoccupation of the individual to the exclusion of all other thoughts and aspirations. In order to procure the objects of physical pleasures, accumulation of wealth follows. To achieve more and more wealth, power becomes necessary. But the insatiable hunger for physical enjoyment does not allow one to stop within one’s own national boundaries. On the strength of its state power, the stronger nation tries to subdue and exploit the other in order to swell its own coffers. This leads to conflicts and conflagrations. And once this process starts there is no end to it. Moral bonds are all snapped. Normal human emotions are dried up. The values and virtues, which ought to distinguish man from the rest of animal kingdom, vanish. And it is this process of degeneration of man that is clothed in attractive terms such as ‘competition’ and ‘raising the standard of human living. 

Let Examples Speak 

The instance of how the American nation came into being is a lurid reminder of this inhuman state of affairs. Various peoples from Europe sailed forth to that continent in search of material wealth and happiness and began to establish their settlements. In the process, they annihilated the original inhabitants of that land. The barbaric atrocities and the savage genocide indulged in by the so called civilized Whites makes hair-raising reading. The original Red Indians who have managed to exist till today in certain areas have remained there as but show-piece specimens. Nor is America a solitary instance. Wherever the Western White had gone, whether Australia, America or Southern America, they have left behind the same trail of death and destruction. Even recently, we 

have heard of similar horrors perpetrated against the natives by the Whites in South America. 

The same is the case with the Communist dictatorships – Russia and China. There also, the one end and aim of all their plans is to "raise the standard of living", though clothed in a different terminology. As a result, the same process is at work: amassing of objects of physical enjoyment; to achieve this, resorting to accumulation of more and more wealth; and to achieve that, greater aggrandizement of power followed by invasion and exploitation of weaker nations, conflicts, genocide and resultant de-humanising effects. 

If one were to dispassionately observe the characteristics of the present-day so-called civilized modern societies, they appear to tally, almost word to word, with the attributes of the asuras as detailed in Bhagawad-Gita ! 

And thus we find that the two prominent features of the modem Western society, i.e. "permissiveness" and "competition", have led human society away from peace and happiness. 

We shall now go a bit deeper into the problem in order to find out the basic cause for this failure. 

The "Modern" Predicament 

The basic impulse of all living beings, as all know is to seek happiness. So also, man. He desires to be happy – not for a day or two but continuously all through his life. And it is through the senses that man, like other living beings, tries to seek that happiness. To start with, there are the bodily and mental needs and appetites. The fulfillment of these hungers gives him a sense of happiness. There is no denying the fact that such fulfillment gives man happiness for some time. But it is also equally true that it is fleeting, temporary. Experience teaches him that the more he tries to enjoy the pleasures of the flesh the more acute becomes the hunger. He never feels satisfied. Greater the attempts for satisfaction of desires, greater will be the dissatisfaction. As such, greater the amassing of objects of enjoyment greater is the disappointment; greater the indulgence, greater is the disenchantment. Our Shastras have declared, "Na jatu Kamah Kamanamupabhogena shamyati" the desires are not quenched by enjoyment of sense. Even after the body becomes old and dilapidated, desires continue to be young : Trishna na jeerna vayameva jeernah. This is exactly the predicament in which the modern man is finding himself. 

Source is Within 

The Hindu philosophy steps in here to offer a cogent solution. It says, the real source of happiness lies within oneself and not without. Even a little introspection will bear this out. Take the instance of a man who is absorbed in enjoyment of music. Just then if he receives a wire conveying the death of a near and dear one, he immediately loses all interest in the music and goes away. If really music had the inherent power to give 

happiness, then it should have made the man overcome his sorrow and made him continue to listen to music. But the very opposite was the effect. Music, which was a source of enjoyment till a moment before had now become a point of repulsion to him. 

It only means that the external objects which, appear to give us happiness serve only as pretexts or instruments whereas its real source is within. But still we go after the external objects only because of delusion. It is like a dog, which begins to bite and chew dry bone. After a time, the bone pieces cut into its mouth. Blood oozes out. The dog tastes that blood and feels elated. That is how the external objects seem to give us happiness! It is obvious that such enjoyments will, after a while, stop giving us pleasure and land us in sorrow and disappointment. 

Secret of Bliss 

How then should one get at the source of happiness within oneself? A little reflection will show that even the object of enjoyment will entirely go out of the mind during that particular moment when one is supposed to be enjoying that object. It only means that we experience the happiness, which is inherent in us and not anything flowing out of that external object. Then the obvious conclusion would be that in order to be eternally and continuously happy, we should be able to reach that state where we can be happy without the aid of any external object. 

Then what is the process for reaching that state? 

It is a matter of common experience that a restless mind can never be happy. It is only when the mind is calm and peaceful that man enjoys happiness. To achieve such a quiet and tranquil state of mind it is necessary to see that the various types of desires do not raise their heads in the mind. When the water is disturbed with ripples one cannot see what is at the bottom. Nor can we see our reflection in it. When the ripples calm down and the water becomes still everything becomes clear. So also, when the mind becomes quiet one becomes aware of the reality in the depths of human mind. So long as the mind is restless that awareness is lost. And so happiness, which stems from the awareness of that reality is also lost. It only means that if the mental waves could be quietened, then one could enjoy happiness even without the aid of any external object of enjoyment. 

The Supreme Goal 

When man realises this truth – that real happiness does not reside in external objects but in himself – then will he turn his gaze inside. The pulls of those objects will then gradually wear off. And when he completely frees himself from the attachment of the external objects he will attain the supreme state of liberation. Such a man will not run about seeking enjoyment in the outside world. He has no cravings of the physical desires which would render him restless, he is supremely contented, tranquil and at peace with himself, having found the fountainhead of true and everlasting joy and bliss within himself. And that happiness would be constant and unbounded in comparison with which the pleasure derived from the external objects would pale into insignificance. That is the 

highest state to which man has to aspire and ultimately reach – the state of Mukti or Moksha 

Why the Failure 

When examined on the touchstone of this basic philosophy of supreme happiness, can the so-called progressive societies with their cut-throat competition, jealousy, hatred and violence be ever expected to give rise to human happiness? Is such a state of affairs conducive to making the human mind quiet and tranquil? In fact, the opposite is the case. Everything is calculated to incite more and more desires. The flames of desire are fed more and more. And so long as desires are unfulfilled mind is restless. It always hankers after the objects of senses. How then can such a mind become quiet and peaceful? 

The Yoga Way 

In Bharat, all our training is directed towards the single object of achieving mental peace. Patanjali in his Yoga-Sutras has advised that when one sees others are endowed with prosperity and happiness and virtuous and meritorious one is advised not to be jealous but to be happy and congratulate them. One is advised to achieve progress by one’s efforts but one should not indulge in competition or jealousy. One has to be circumspect and discriminative in deciding how much and in what fashion one has to amass and enjoy the external objects of enjoyment. Otherwise, it results in oneself trying to become happy even at the cost of others’ happiness. And this will disturb one’s mental balance thus destroying one’s own happiness. So also, Patanjali advises that when we see another man sinful and in distress, our natural reaction should be one of compassion. We should strive to the best of our capacity to alleviate the other’s suffering. Such an attitude on our part will bring peace and tranquility to our mind resulting in inner happiness to ourselves. 

"Permissiveness" to Suffer ! 

The next feature of the modern civilization, "permissiveness" is the very opposite of peace and tranquility. Our ancient scriptures describe a time when there were no rules or codes of social conduct. But soon it bred enmity and conflict between man and man and led to anarchy and immorality all-round. That resulted in uncertainty, anxiety, fear, jealousy, hatred and all such propensities, which destroy the mental tranquility. Hence rules of behaviour were framed which would help avoiding such mental disturbances and restore mental balance and peace. 

After all, the modern societies have come to the fore during last one or two centuries. It is not safe to come to conclusion regarding the essential aspects of human life on the strength of such limited experience, carried away by the dazzling appearance of their physical prosperity and scientific and technological achievements. It is only on the touchstone of long and enduring experience that one has to judge and decide the right kind of life-attitudes which lead to the real happiness of man. 

Harmony of Both 

The experience of millennia of our national life in this country says that the craze for unlimited sensual enjoyment and competitive rage to satiate the same would never lead to happiness. It has taught us to cultivate self-restraint – a requisite as much necessary to the preservation of social fabric as to the development of the individuals. In order to instil the spirit of self-restraint the concept of Chaturvidha Purusharta was propounded. This four- fold goal of life – Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha – helps one to lead a self- restrained, balanced and harmonious way of life. And that arrangement envisages duties and obligations for the individual on both the planes – personal and social. Rules of behaviour – Dharma – conducive to achieving the supreme happiness of man will guide and control all the material aspects of life – Artha (politics and economics) and Kama (fulfilment of physical desires) 

Two Bounds of River of Life 

The soul and spirit of all these rules of conduct would be the supreme urge to finally attain the real state of our being, i.e. Moksha or whatever name is given to this fourth Purushartha. It is thus that all our physical propensities and enjoyments are held between Dharma on the one hand and Moksha on the other. Just as the river flowing within the bounds on either side will be beneficial, but becomes destructive when it breaks its bounds, so also is the case with the stream of human life. It is only when it flows between the two bounds of Dharma and Moksha that it will be conducive to the happiness of both the individual and the society. Whatever is permissible within these two bounds could be enjoyed by one and all. It is only this arrangement that can strike a balance between enjoyment and peace of mind and ultimately lead one to the state of highest bliss. 

The mission of Hindu consolidation that the RSS has taken up is inspired by this vision of unlocking the door of supreme happiness for entire mankind. And as days go by, we are confident, the so-called progressive modern societies are also bound to take refuge in this ancient yet living wisdom of this holy land. As the Samskrit saying goes, 

Rkon xtZfUr 'kkL=kkf.k tEcqdk fofius ;FkkA Uk xtZfr egkrstk ;kon osnkUr dsljhAA 

("The jackals of other theories will be howling only so long as the Lion of Vedanta does not give out the great and all-powerful roar !") 

## III. Challenge of the Times* 

Birth of Democracy as a reaction – The evil of Capitalism – Next reaction, Communism – Falsity of its prophecy and promise, ex: Russia – Both theories shifting from original stand – Both stemming from materialism – Failure as a theory – Wrong concept of equality – Our view of individual and society – Man, not system, important. , 

After the British have left our country we are faced with the problem of deciding the right pattern for our future national reconstruction. There are two major patterns of social set-up which are in vogue in the modern world. 

Fate of First Reaction 

One, the older of the two, is called Democracy. It originated as a reaction to the unbridled monarchy in the countries of Europe. The individual was then a mere serf, devoid of all initiative and freedom, just a toy in the hands of the ‘divine’ kings. People rose in revolt, overthrew ‘the divine right of kingship’ and smashed the power of monarchy for all time. The inspiring slogan of ‘liberty, equality and fraternity’ was on the lips of everybody. It was loudly trumpeted from housetops that the long dark night of slavery and tyranny had finally ended and a new era of ‘individual freedom’, sanctity of the individual rights’ and ‘equality of opportunity for all’ had dawned. 

But, by about the same time, the age of machine also had set in. Industries had begun to flourish. Science and technology had begun helping industrialists to set up bigger and bigger plants. Millions of labourers were employed in those engines of mass production. Under the slogan of ‘equality of opportunity’ persons with greater intelligence and wealth monopolised all those new avenues of production of wealth and became the unchallenged financial overlords. On the strength of their overwhelming power of money they even captured the political machinery. And the common people were left high and dry, except for a solitary political right to vote, which too they were not free to use under the oppressive economic conditions. 

Thus the high-sounding concept of ‘individual freedom’ only meant the freedom of those talented few to exploit the rest of the common people and reduce them to abject serfdom. The horrible conditions of the labourers -men, women and even children – working in those factories defied all description. They were now groaning under the heels of the new tyrants in place of the old. 

Tragedy of Second Reaction 

It was at this stage that Communism came up as a reaction against the new tyranny of Capitalism. Communism started with the assumption that industrial revolution was bound to result in dire economic disparity, giving rise to two classes, the ‘haves’(Capitalists) 

and the ‘have-nots’ (Proletariat, i.e., working class). There would, therefore, ensue a class * Talk delivered at Bangalore on 2nd November 1949. 

conflict in which, they again assumed, the proletariat would come out victorious. After that, there would be an end to the misery of the masses as the state, run by the working class, would take over the entire burden of looking after the material needs of the people by controlling all means of production and distribution of wealth. Thus, it was prophesied that greater the industrialisation of a country, greater the economic disparity and therefore, greater the class conflict and sooner the ushering in of the rule of the proletariat. 

But this prophecy – which was the climax of its materialistic interpretation of history – was completely belied by the future course of history. Out of all countries it was in Russia, industrially a most backward country, that Communist revolution registered its first success. Even to this day countries like America, England and Germany which are in the forefront of industrial progress – in fact where the industrial revolution first took shape – have not shown any signs of advancing towards Communism. On the contrary, it was China, another industrially backward country, which has become Communist in recent years. Thus the claim of historical inevitability of Communism based on its materialistic interpretation of human history has been shattered on the rock of hard realities. 

Secondly, what is the condition of the common mass of people in that promised land of freedom, peace and plenty? It is all too well known that the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ has been reduced to the dictatorship of the dictator of the dictatorial party, i.e. the Communist in these countries. Mass liquidations, slave camps, communes, forced labour, brainwashing and all such inhuman engines of dictatorship have reduced the individual to such low depths of misery and slavery as was unheard of even under the unbridled kingship or during the worst days of Capitalism. That is how their call of ‘‘you have nothing to lose but your chains’ to the masses has resulted in practice! 

The Promise and the Performance 

Have they, at least, succeeded in their goal of satisfying the primary material needs of their people, which was their first promise to them? Take the example of Russia, the first great country, which made the experiment in a thorough-going manner. They liquidated all private property, all the industrialists, and took over all industries in their own hands. On the agricultural front, they liquidated all the landlords and the peasants, grouped them into communes and collective farms. So, it was from all aspects a thorough going experiment. Naturally we ought to expect a tremendous growth in the prosperity of Russia during the past fifty years. 

Some say, "Look, they have been able to send a rocket to the moon". But so far as the masses, in whose name they speak, are concerned, going to the moon is not their main problem. Belly is their major problem. It was, in fact, the main pivot of the Communist revolution. Have the Russian Government been able to give two square meals to the residents of their country? That is the first question. As a matter of fact the success of any 

government or any particular theory of government is to be measured in terms of its capacity to give every citizen two square meals, a place to rest in, sufficient clothing, treatment in case of illness, and education. That is the acid test. 

Has Russia answered this test? Russia has an extensive territory. At one time, it was the biggest wheat-producing country in the world. In proportion, the population is small and so a smaller number of mouths to feed. They have all the modern implements of agriculture. Added to that are the colossal resources of the all-powerful State at the back of each and every plan. In spite of all these, in order to feed the resident citizens of Russia, the Russian Government has to actually import wheat and other edibles from Canada, from USA and other countries. A more convincing proof of the utter defeat of Communism need not be called for now! 

The Grand Retreat of Both 

Faced with such tragic consequences, the Communist countries, too, are having second thoughts about their system of absolute governmentalisation. They have begun to realise that the destruction of individual freedom kills the creative urge and incentive for work in the individual. They are, therefore, gradually moving towards individual freedom. They are being compelled, as in some East European countries and even in Russia, to allow the individual to own a few things and a little freedom to enjoy his property. 

Chester Bowles of America has stated: "Russia is now allowing, what are called, ‘kitchen farms’ to be personally cultivated by farmers to the tune of 34% of the total land they cultivate. But the production from these 34% personal holdings (which do not have the benefit of heavy farm-machinery which is all monopolised by the State) has been 60% of the total produce, whereas 66% of the State-owned farms has yielded but 40%." That has once again proved that the promise of total governmentalisation, i.e., absolute collectivism, with which they started, is beating a hasty retreat in the land of its own birth. 

On the other hand, those countries where Democracy was born with the promise of ‘absolute individualism’ have also gone back upon their original stand. Having seen the tragic results of the unrestrained ‘equality of opportunity’ and of ‘freedom of the individual’, they were forced to undertake drastic measures to curtail in practice those theoretical concepts in the interest of the common social good. In fact, that is how they were able to avoid revolution and maintain their democratic structure. 

We thus find that both the above theories, Democracy and Communism, have two things in common, i.e., both were born as reactions to the previous order and both have had to resile from their original stand and forced to move towards each other – Democracy from its individualism towards collectivism and Communism from its collectivism towards individualism. In respect of both their birth and growth there is a remarkable similarity though, of course, their starting points were diametrical opposites because of historical reasons. 

Stemming from the Same Root 

This need not cause any surprise to us, for if we go deeper and get at their roots we find that both of them stem from a common concept of the goal of human life. According to the Western thought – from which both the concepts of Democracy and Communism took birth – the life of man for all practical purposes is limited to the physical plane. And the human being is just a bundle of physical wants. Accordingly, production and distribution of material objects, which were believed to satisfy the material appetites of man became the one all-consuming passion of all their theories. Further, equality of man was propounded on the material plane because all men were equally in need of all these basic material needs. 

As the individual was only a physical entity goaded entirely by those physical desires, there was no reason for him to look upon society as anything more then an instrument to serve his needs. But a society made up of such individuals exclusively dedicated to their own selfish interests could not be expected to endure even for a day. Society, for its sustenance, demands a spirit of sacrifice on the part of its constituents. And without society, individuals also cannot carry on their physical existence. So a sort of compromise, a contract, had to be worked out between the conflicting interests of the individual and the society. 

This ‘contract theory’ is thus the result of the concept of an inherent conflict between the individual and the society. It is this basic conflict that expressed itself in the form of Capitalism on the one hand and Communism on the other, i.e., on the one hand, the individual becoming the enemy of society and on the other, the society becoming the enemy of the individual. And as we have seen, both the systems are now trying to mitigate the evils that have flowed from the common materialistic concept of human goal. 

Materialism Fails 

But to identify man with a mere bundle of material desires is to equate him with an animal. If man is just an animal, why should he lead an amicable and ordered life? All that can be said is that human beings do not prey upon one another like animals, simply because if X wants to devour Y, some Z will try to devour X. Thus, to prevent themselves from being mutually destroyed, some sort of arrangement had to be arrived at. But it cannot explain why the will to sacrifice for others, the spirit of comradeship in misery, should at all rise in the mind of man. But all through the history of mankind we come across such persons who have sacrificed their lives for others willingly, lovingly and smilingly. There is the story of Dadhichi in our ancient literature who volunteered to offer his bones to be made into a weapon to destroy the demon Vrittasura. He was a seer living in the forest. As an individual he desired nothing. Then, what made him to sacrifice himself ? 

Let us take an instance of this twentieth century. Once in Calcutta, two little children playing on the roadside fell into an open manhole. A gentleman who was hurrying to his 

office, happened to see the children suddenly disappearing in the manhole. Without even waiting to take off his coat he jumped into the manhole, caught hold of the children who were being washed away in the current and pushed them outside. But he himself was caught in the mud and died. Why did he die? What is that told him, "Go, that is your direction?" Materialism does not explain. 

The Real Basis 

There is only one explanation. And that is, there is one common Living Reality in all of us which furnishes the common inner bond. Our philosophy call it Atma. We love and serve one another not because of the external relations, but because of the community of that Atma. Yajnavalkya tells Maitreyi: 

Uk ok vjs eS=ksf; iR;q% dkek; ifr% fiz;ks Hkofr vkReuLrq dkek; ifr% fç; ̈ Hkofr A 

(O Maitrey! Man is not loved (by wife) because he is the husband, but because of the Atma in him) It is in this sense, i.e,, the same spirit being immanent in all, that all men are equal. Equality is applicable only on the plane of the Supreme Spirit. But on the physical plane the same Spirit manifests itself in a wondrous variety of diversities and disparities. 

According to our philosophy, the very projection of the Universe is due to a disturbance in the equilibrium of its three attributes – sattva, rajas and tamas – and if there is a ‘gunasamya’, perfect balance of the three attributes, then the Universe will dissolve back to the Unmanifest State. Thus, disparity is an indivisible part of nature and we have to live with it. Our efforts should be only to keep it in limits and take away the sting born out of it. 

False Prophets 

So any arrangement that tries to remove the inherent disparities altogether on the basis of superficial equality is bound to fail. Democracy, even at this advance stage in the Western countries, is after all, the rule by a few who are well versed in the art of politics and capable of winning the masses to their line. The concept of Democracy as being ‘by the people’ and ‘of the people’, meaning that all are equal shares in the political administration, is, to a very large extent, only a myth in practice. 

Communism, too, has completely failed to realise any of its declared concepts of equality. It had envisaged that after the establishment of the dictatorship of proletariat all will have food and other necessities of life satisfied. Then there will be no room for mutual conflict thus obviating the necessity for a central authority. Thus the State would wither away and a governmentless ‘ anarchic’ society would come into being. According to Communism, this is the highest state of equality that man can conceive of . But Communism, based as it is on materialism, cannot explain how that ideal state can come to life. If men are mere animals, i.e, mere material beings, they do not devour each other only because of the fear of the powers that be. But when this power or authority is no more, then why will they live without strife? Man as an animal is a victim of passion and passions get more intense when gratified. How then will such a dissatisfied man live in peace and harmony with others? And what guarantee is there that even after the satisfaction of his personal needs, man, who is more ingenious than other animals will not follow the ‘dog-in-the-manger’ policy? So even if we support that equality is established, it will again lead to inequality. Thus another bloody revolution will be necessitated. Which means, violent upheavals and strifes are the cornerstones of this theory. To raise always the slogan of revolution is to encourage and invite armed strifes, anarchy and murder of peace. 

The picture which is thus visualised neither contains any signs of the withering away of the central power nor any possibility of the emergence of peace after the disappearance of the authority even if by chance it takes place. That during the past fifty years the Communist State in Russia has not shown any signs of withering away but has grown all the more powerful, is a living proof of the utter falsity of its theoretical base. 

Not Equality but Harmony 

Our philosophy, on the other hand, has pictured the highest state of society and offered for it a cogent explanation too. It is described as: 

u jkT;« u p jktk··lhr u n.M; ̈ u p nkf.Md% A ?ke¡sZ.kSo çtkLlokZ j{kfUr Le ijLije AA 

(There existed no state, no king, no penalty and no criminal. All protected one another by virtue of dharma). Dharma is the universal code of right conduct that awakens the Common Inner Bond, restrains selfishness, and keeps the people together in that harmonious state even without external authority. There will be no selfishness, no hoarding and all men will live and work for the whole. 

And it is dharma that is the distinguishing feature of human life 

vkgkjfuækHk;eSFkqu« p LkkekU;esrRi'kqfHkuZjk.kke A /ke ̈Z fg rs"kkef/kd ̈ fo'ks"k ̈ /kesZ.k ghuk% i'kqfHk% lekuk% AA 

(Food, sleep, fear and lust are common to both animal and man. The special attribute of man is dharma; without it he is no better than an animal) 

It is through the full manifestation of dharma in human life that human beings will be able to live in that state of highest harmony in spite of the inherent disparities in nature. It 

is like the co-operation of a blind man with a lame man. The lame man gets a leg and the blind man an eye. The spirit of co-operation takes away the sting of disparity. 

Our view of the relation between individual and society has always been not one of conflict but of harmony and co-operation born out of the consciousness of a single Reality running through all the individuals. The individual is a living limb of the corporate social personality. The individual and the society supplement and complement each other with the result that both get strengthened and benefited. 

Mistaking Means for Ends 

The essential point, therefore, is the moulding of individuals after the real image of man imbued with the sublime principles of innate oneness and harmony, i.e., of dharma. Indeed, a system works ill or well according as the men who work it out are bad or good. That is why, in the absence of men inspired with the right spirit, Democracy deteriorates into ‘mediocracy’ and is often reduced to ‘mobocracy’. The tragedy of the various theories and ‘isms’ propounded by the West is that they were taken to be the ends in themselves to the utter neglect of building the quality of man. They ignored the simple yet fundamental truth that systems and ‘isms’ are at best only means for the fulfillment of man’s life. It is mistaking the means for the ends that has landed these attempts in results diametrically opposite to what they had prophesied or expected. 

Even to this day, democratic countries are plagued by grave social problems arising out of this basic confusion of placing system above man. They system of Democracy that they have evolved breeds two evils – self-praise and vilification of others – which poison the peace and tranquility of the human mind and disrupt the mutual harmony of individuals in society. In the present set-up both these are to be freely indulged in during elections. 

This is the reason why in our national tradition, we did not bother much about the external form of the government but concentrated upon the moulding of man as the chief guiding factor in all our systems. Many forms were tried here right from republic to monarchy. And we find that the monarchy, which bred such tyranny and gave rise to bloody revolutions in the West, was found to be a highly beneficial institution continuing for thousands of years showering peace and prosperity on the whole of our people, with the spirit of freedom alive in every sphere of life. 

After the British have left our country we are faced with the problem of deciding the right pattern for our future national reconstruction. There are two major patterns of social set-up which are in vogue in the modern world. 

Fate of First Reaction 

One, the older of the two, is called Democracy. It originated as a reaction to the unbridled monarchy in the countries of Europe. The individual was then a mere serf, devoid of all initiative and freedom, just a toy in the hands of the ‘divine’ kings. People rose in revolt, 

overthrew ‘the divine right of kingship’ and smashed the power of monarchy for all time. The inspiring slogan of ‘liberty, equality and fraternity’ was on the lips of everybody. It was loudly trumpeted from housetops that the long dark night of slavery and tyranny had finally ended and a new era of ‘individual freedom’, sanctity of the individual rights’ and ‘equality of opportunity for all’ had dawned. 

But, by about the same time, the age of machine also had set in. Industries had begun to flourish. Science and technology had begun helping industrialists to set up bigger and bigger plants. Millions of labourers were employed in those engines of mass production. Under the slogan of ‘equality of opportunity’ persons with greater intelligence and wealth monopolised all those new avenues of production of wealth and became the unchallenged financial overlords. On the strength of their overwhelming power of money they even captured the political machinery. And the common people were left high and dry, except for a solitary political right to vote, which too they were not free to use under the oppressive economic conditions. 

Thus the high-sounding concept of ‘individual freedom’ only meant the freedom of those talented few to exploit the rest of the common people and reduce them to abject serfdom. The horrible conditions of the labourers -men, women and even children – working in those factories defied all description. They were now groaning under the heels of the new tyrants in place of the old. 

Tragedy of Second Reaction 

It was at this stage that Communism came up as a reaction against the new tyranny of Capitalism. Communism started with the assumption that industrial revolution was bound to result in dire economic disparity, giving rise to two classes, the ‘haves’(Capitalists) and the ‘have-nots’ (Proletariat, i.e., working class). There would, therefore, ensue a class * Talk delivered at Bangalore on 2nd November 1949. 

conflict in which, they again assumed, the proletariat would come out victorious. After that, there would be an end to the misery of the masses as the state, run by the working class, would take over the entire burden of looking after the material needs of the people by controlling all means of production and distribution of wealth. Thus, it was prophesied that greater the industrialisation of a country, greater the economic disparity and therefore, greater the class conflict and sooner the ushering in of the rule of the proletariat. 

But this prophecy – which was the climax of its materialistic interpretation of history – was completely belied by the future course of history. Out of all countries it was in Russia, industrially a most backward country, that Communist revolution registered its first success. Even to this day countries like America, England and Germany which are in the forefront of industrial progress – in fact where the industrial revolution first took shape – have not shown any signs of advancing towards Communism. On the contrary, it was China, another industrially backward country, which has become Communist in recent years. Thus the claim of historical inevitability of Communism based on its 

materialistic interpretation of human history has been shattered on the rock of hard realities. 

Secondly, what is the condition of the common mass of people in that promised land of freedom, peace and plenty? It is all too well known that the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ has been reduced to the dictatorship of the dictator of the dictatorial party, i.e. the Communist in these countries. Mass liquidations, slave camps, communes, forced labour, brainwashing and all such inhuman engines of dictatorship have reduced the individual to such low depths of misery and slavery as was unheard of even under the unbridled kingship or during the worst days of Capitalism. That is how their call of ‘‘you have nothing to lose but your chains’ to the masses has resulted in practice! 

The Promise and the Performance 

Have they, at least, succeeded in their goal of satisfying the primary material needs of their people, which was their first promise to them? Take the example of Russia, the first great country, which made the experiment in a thorough-going manner. They liquidated all private property, all the industrialists, and took over all industries in their own hands. On the agricultural front, they liquidated all the landlords and the peasants, grouped them into communes and collective farms. So, it was from all aspects a thorough going experiment. Naturally we ought to expect a tremendous growth in the prosperity of Russia during the past fifty years. 

Some say, "Look, they have been able to send a rocket to the moon". But so far as the masses, in whose name they speak, are concerned, going to the moon is not their main problem. Belly is their major problem. It was, in fact, the main pivot of the Communist revolution. Have the Russian Government been able to give two square meals to the residents of their country? That is the first question. As a matter of fact the success of any government or any particular theory of government is to be measured in terms of its capacity to give every citizen two square meals, a place to rest in, sufficient clothing, treatment in case of illness, and education. That is the acid test. 

Has Russia answered this test? Russia has an extensive territory. At one time, it was the biggest wheat-producing country in the world. In proportion, the population is small and so a smaller number of mouths to feed. They have all the modern implements of agriculture. Added to that are the colossal resources of the all-powerful State at the back of each and every plan. In spite of all these, in order to feed the resident citizens of Russia, the Russian Government has to actually import wheat and other edibles from Canada, from USA and other countries. A more convincing proof of the utter defeat of Communism need not be called for now! 

The Grand Retreat of Both 

Faced with such tragic consequences, the Communist countries, too, are having second thoughts about their system of absolute governmentalisation. They have begun to realise that the destruction of individual freedom kills the creative urge and incentive for work in 

the individual. They are, therefore, gradually moving towards individual freedom. They are being compelled, as in some East European countries and even in Russia, to allow the individual to own a few things and a little freedom to enjoy his property. 

Chester Bowles of America has stated: "Russia is now allowing, what are called, ‘kitchen farms’ to be personally cultivated by farmers to the tune of 34% of the total land they cultivate. But the production from these 34% personal holdings (which do not have the benefit of heavy farm-machinery which is all monopolised by the State) has been 60% of the total produce, whereas 66% of the State-owned farms has yielded but 40%." That has once again proved that the promise of total governmentalisation, i.e., absolute collectivism, with which they started, is beating a hasty retreat in the land of its own birth. 

On the other hand, those countries where Democracy was born with the promise of ‘absolute individualism’ have also gone back upon their original stand. Having seen the tragic results of the unrestrained ‘equality of opportunity’ and of ‘freedom of the individual’, they were forced to undertake drastic measures to curtail in practice those theoretical concepts in the interest of the common social good. In fact, that is how they were able to avoid revolution and maintain their democratic structure. 

We thus find that both the above theories, Democracy and Communism, have two things in common, i.e., both were born as reactions to the previous order and both have had to resile from their original stand and forced to move towards each other – Democracy from its individualism towards collectivism and Communism from its collectivism towards individualism. In respect of both their birth and growth there is a remarkable similarity though, of course, their starting points were diametrical opposites because of historical reasons. 

Stemming from the Same Root 

This need not cause any surprise to us, for if we go deeper and get at their roots we find that both of them stem from a common concept of the goal of human life. According to the Western thought – from which both the concepts of Democracy and Communism took birth – the life of man for all practical purposes is limited to the physical plane. And the human being is just a bundle of physical wants. Accordingly, production and distribution of material objects, which were believed to satisfy the material appetites of man became the one all-consuming passion of all their theories. Further, equality of man was propounded on the material plane because all men were equally in need of all these basic material needs. 

As the individual was only a physical entity goaded entirely by those physical desires, there was no reason for him to look upon society as anything more then an instrument to serve his needs. But a society made up of such individuals exclusively dedicated to their own selfish interests could not be expected to endure even for a day. Society, for its sustenance, demands a spirit of sacrifice on the part of its constituents. And without society, individuals also cannot carry on their physical existence. So a sort of 

compromise, a contract, had to be worked out between the conflicting interests of the individual and the society. 

This ‘contract theory’ is thus the result of the concept of an inherent conflict between the individual and the society. It is this basic conflict that expressed itself in the form of Capitalism on the one hand and Communism on the other, i.e., on the one hand, the individual becoming the enemy of society and on the other, the society becoming the enemy of the individual. And as we have seen, both the systems are now trying to mitigate the evils that have flowed from the common materialistic concept of human goal. 

Materialism Fails 

But to identify man with a mere bundle of material desires is to equate him with an animal. If man is just an animal, why should he lead an amicable and ordered life? All that can be said is that human beings do not prey upon one another like animals, simply because if X wants to devour Y, some Z will try to devour X. Thus, to prevent themselves from being mutually destroyed, some sort of arrangement had to be arrived at. But it cannot explain why the will to sacrifice for others, the spirit of comradeship in misery, should at all rise in the mind of man. But all through the history of mankind we come across such persons who have sacrificed their lives for others willingly, lovingly and smilingly. There is the story of Dadhichi in our ancient literature who volunteered to offer his bones to be made into a weapon to destroy the demon Vrittasura. He was a seer living in the forest. As an individual he desired nothing. Then, what made him to sacrifice himself ? 

Let us take an instance of this twentieth century. Once in Calcutta, two little children playing on the roadside fell into an open manhole. A gentleman who was hurrying to his office, happened to see the children suddenly disappearing in the manhole. Without even waiting to take off his coat he jumped into the manhole, caught hold of the children who were being washed away in the current and pushed them outside. But he himself was caught in the mud and died. Why did he die? What is that told him, "Go, that is your direction?" Materialism does not explain. 

The Real Basis 

There is only one explanation. And that is, there is one common Living Reality in all of us which furnishes the common inner bond. Our philosophy call it Atma. We love and serve one another not because of the external relations, but because of the community of that Atma. Yajnavalkya tells Maitreyi: 

Uk ok vjs eS=ksf; iR;q% dkek; ifr% fiz;ks Hkofr vkReuLrq dkek; ifr% fç; ̈ Hkofr A 

(O Maitrey! Man is not loved (by wife) because he is the husband, but because of the Atma in him) It is in this sense, i.e,, the same spirit being immanent in all, that all men are equal. Equality is applicable only on the plane of the Supreme Spirit. But on the physical plane the same Spirit manifests itself in a wondrous variety of diversities and disparities. 

According to our philosophy, the very projection of the Universe is due to a disturbance in the equilibrium of its three attributes – sattva, rajas and tamas – and if there is a ‘gunasamya’, perfect balance of the three attributes, then the Universe will dissolve back to the Unmanifest State. Thus, disparity is an indivisible part of nature and we have to live with it. Our efforts should be only to keep it in limits and take away the sting born out of it. 

False Prophets 

So any arrangement that tries to remove the inherent disparities altogether on the basis of superficial equality is bound to fail. Democracy, even at this advance stage in the Western countries, is after all, the rule by a few who are well versed in the art of politics and capable of winning the masses to their line. The concept of Democracy as being ‘by the people’ and ‘of the people’, meaning that all are equal shares in the political administration, is, to a very large extent, only a myth in practice. 

Communism, too, has completely failed to realise any of its declared concepts of equality. It had envisaged that after the establishment of the dictatorship of proletariat all will have food and other necessities of life satisfied. Then there will be no room for mutual conflict thus obviating the necessity for a central authority. Thus the State would wither away and a governmentless ‘ anarchic’ society would come into being. According to Communism, this is the highest state of equality that man can conceive of . 

But Communism, based as it is on materialism, cannot explain how that ideal state can come to life. If men are mere animals, i.e, mere material beings, they do not devour each other only because of the fear of the powers that be. But when this power or authority is no more, then why will they live without strife? Man as an animal is a victim of passion and passions get more intense when gratified. How then will such a dissatisfied man live in peace and harmony with others? And what guarantee is there that even after the satisfaction of his personal needs, man, who is more ingenious than other animals will not follow the ‘dog-in-the-manger’ policy? So even if we support that equality is established, it will again lead to inequality. Thus another bloody revolution will be necessitated. Which means, violent upheavals and strifes are the cornerstones of this theory. To raise always the slogan of revolution is to encourage and invite armed strifes, anarchy and murder of peace. 

The picture which is thus visualised neither contains any signs of the withering away of the central power nor any possibility of the emergence of peace after the disappearance of the authority even if by chance it takes place. That during the past fifty years the Communist State in Russia has not shown any signs of withering away but has grown all the more powerful, is a living proof of the utter falsity of its theoretical base. 

Not Equality but Harmony 

Our philosophy, on the other hand, has pictured the highest state of society and offered for it a cogent explanation too. It is described as: 

u jkT;« u p jktk··lhr u n.M; ̈ u p nkf.Md% A ?ke¡sZ.kSo çtkLlokZ j{kfUr Le ijLije AA 

(There existed no state, no king, no penalty and no criminal. All protected one another by virtue of dharma). Dharma is the universal code of right conduct that awakens the Common Inner Bond, restrains selfishness, and keeps the people together in that harmonious state even without external authority. There will be no selfishness, no hoarding and all men will live and work for the whole. 

And it is dharma that is the distinguishing feature of human life 

vkgkjfuækHk;eSFkqu« p LkkekU;esrRi'kqfHkuZjk.kke A /ke ̈Z fg rs"kkef/kd ̈ fo'ks"k ̈ /kesZ.k ghuk% i'kqfHk% lekuk% AA 

(Food, sleep, fear and lust are common to both animal and man. The special attribute of man is dharma; without it he is no better than an animal) 

It is through the full manifestation of dharma in human life that human beings will be able to live in that state of highest harmony in spite of the inherent disparities in nature. It is like the co-operation of a blind man with a lame man. The lame man gets a leg and the blind man an eye. The spirit of co-operation takes away the sting of disparity. 

Our view of the relation between individual and society has always been not one of conflict but of harmony and co-operation born out of the consciousness of a single Reality running through all the individuals. The individual is a living limb of the corporate social personality. The individual and the society supplement and complement each other with the result that both get strengthened and benefited. 

Mistaking Means for Ends 

The essential point, therefore, is the moulding of individuals after the real image of man imbued with the sublime principles of innate oneness and harmony, i.e., of dharma. Indeed, a system works ill or well according as the men who work it out are bad or good. That is why, in the absence of men inspired with the right spirit, Democracy deteriorates into ‘mediocracy’ and is often reduced to ‘mobocracy’. The tragedy of the various theories and ‘isms’ propounded by the West is that they were taken to be the ends in themselves to the utter neglect of building the quality of man. They ignored the simple yet fundamental truth that systems and ‘isms’ are at best only means for the fulfillment of 

man’s life. It is mistaking the means for the ends that has landed these attempts in results diametrically opposite to what they had prophesied or expected. 

Even to this day, democratic countries are plagued by grave social problems arising out of this basic confusion of placing system above man. They system of Democracy that they have evolved breeds two evils – self-praise and vilification of others – which poison the peace and tranquility of the human mind and disrupt the mutual harmony of individuals in society. In the present set-up both these are to be freely indulged in during elections. 

This is the reason why in our national tradition, we did not bother much about the external form of the government but concentrated upon the moulding of man as the chief guiding factor in all our systems. Many forms were tried here right from republic to monarchy. And we find that the monarchy, which bred such tyranny and gave rise to bloody revolutions in the West, was found to be a highly beneficial institution continuing for thousands of years showering peace and prosperity on the whole of our people, with the spirit of freedom alive in every sphere of life. 

## IV. For a Right Structure : Political and Economic 

Present system of elections defective – True representatives do not come up – Couple territorial with functional representation – Make Panchayat election unanimous – socialism leads to slavery-Theory of trusteeship-Striking a balance between individual incentive and decentralisation of wealth-Hindu values, the backbone of success 

Our country has now opted for the democratic structure. But if this arrangement has to succeed, it is essential that the common mass of people should be properly educated and enlightened. Making them mere literates will not serve the purpose. They have to be made aware of their role and responsibilities with respect to the various aspects of our national life such as politics, economics, etc. 

Present Perversions 

It is such an enlightened people alone who will be capable of electing the right type of representatives. If, on the other hand, the common people are uneducated and ignorant they can easily be swayed by the baser appeals of selfishness, parochial interests and vulgar inducements. Representatives elected by such an electorate would never be of a desirable type. And the people as a whole will have to suffer its bitter consequences-at least till the next elections. Such a failure will also result in disillusionment and scepticism about the efficacy of democracy itself. 

The present system of electing representatives results in one more curious phenomenon. A doctor or an advocate or simply a "politician", who knows next to nothing about agriculture, gets elected as the spokesman of the rural electorate! The only qualification to get elected will be one’s skill and capacity to manipulate votes and win the elections. The coming up of the present new class of politicians and representatives – who are more of "politicians" than of "representatives" – over the last three decades is because of this defective system. 

A Few Samples 

I came across a shocking instance during the days of war with Pakistan in 1965. Then the canals on our side had dried up as water had not been allowed from the dam. The canals of Pakistan side were, however, flowing full. When I happened to meet a deputy minister in the defence ministry I asked him as to why the canals had been denied water, whether it would not result in the drying up of crops and shortage of foodgrains and slackening on the internal front. The minister replied that the water flowing in the canals would be a defence risk as that would cause reflections and become an easy target for the enemy planes. When I countered him with the fact of the canals on the Pakistan side flowing full and whether they did not run the risk, the minister had no answer. A few days later I chanced to meet a senior minister. I asked him whether the deputy minister’s explanation was correct. He replied that it was totally baseless and the deputy minister was entirely ignorant of such matters. 

This is how representatives who know nothing of their jobs come to occupy pivotal positions of responsibilities in those fields. And those who are actually in the know of things-the technical experts-will be helpless in such matters. They will have to only carry out the orders from "above". In Bihar, as everyone knows, floods play havoc every year. I asked a railway engineer, who was an authority on bridges, whether the fact of flooding of rivers flowing from the mountains had been taken into account while deciding the number and the length of railway bridges. He confessed that it was not. He also pleaded that in such matters decisions were often based on political and other considerations rather than on the opinion of the experts. 

"Territorial" Plus "Functional" 

This is one of the major obstacles, which the present system of elections has thrown up. What is the way out? One way could be to couple both types of representation: one, the territorial, on the population basis, as at present; and the other, functional, i.e., representatives elected from the various professions and avocations. The latter should include representatives from each important field of national life, the agricultural community being represented by an agriculturist, and so on. This will help, to a certain extent, to correct the imbalance and make the elected group capable of representing all the functions and needs of the society. 

Panchayat – the Cornerstone 

It is this system which has been in vogue in our country since ancient times. Gram Panchayats have been the cornerstones of our socio-economic system. It is these Panchayats which through widening circles of elections, finally elected the Ashta Pradhan Samitis, the eight-member cabinet which acted as the advisory council to the king. These Panchayats were functional in their character. Of course, in those days life was not so complicated as at present. There were, mainly, four functional groups at that time. The first group comprised those devoted to study and teaching of material and spiritual sciences; the second, those entrusted with the running of administration. The third were the traders, and the fourth, those engaged in agriculture and allied handicrafts. There was a fifth group also residing in forests and living on hunting and forest produce. This fifth group was called the Nishada. Representatives of all these five together were taken so as to represent the interests of the society as a whole. 

How to Correct 

These days the slogan of Panchayat-raj is often heard. But the whole system has become perverted. Groupism and casteism have displaced the functional scheme. Notorious goondas often get elected to the Panchayats. Appeal to casteism, lure of money, threats, physical assaults have become the deciding factors; functional expertise has been thrown to winds. However, these distortions will have to be corrected. Well meaning and socially 

conscious persons in each field should be encouraged to come together and exert their influence so as to give a clean and effective rural base to the entire national edifice. Stipulating that elections to Panchayats shall be unanimous, or that there shall be no elections at all, would be a very useful step in this direction. Electoral rolls and rules of elections may be suitably modified so as to ensure such a healthy and purposeful structure at the base. If need be, the Constitution also may be suitably amended. This could help foster a spirit of greater co-operation among the various groups and harmonise their needs and interests. Of course, this approach is not all smooth sailing and does entail several obstacles. But this is an experiment worth trying and is likely to yield beneficial results and minimise the harmful effects of the present system. 

Why Slavery to Words? 

About the structuring of national economy also we have our traditional thought which lays emphasis not merely on the monetary aspect. We have called the Artha Shastra as Neeti Shastra. Today this neeti is limited to Rajneeti-Politics-only. But in our ancient view, both politics and economics came under that one word. 

Today, economics has become the more important factor out of the two. And socialism is often held as an ideal in this regard. But there are so many brands of socialism that it has become well-nigh impossible to understand what exactly is its real nature and content. Guild Socialism, Anarchism, Syndicalism, Communism are all described as various forms of Socialism. Whatever it is, why should we become slaves to such words? It is best that we start afresh basing our thinking on the original concepts reflecting the genius of our own soil. Of course, if there are any positive elements, which we could usefully take up from other thoughts, we must necessarily do so. 

Retreat of Over-Centralisation 

The basic principle of socialism, for example, is decentralisation of economic power. Socialism also emphasises that this decentralisation should be just and equitable. So far, there can be no difference of opinion. But the differences start the moment the question crops up as to who should be empowered to see that the decentralisation is just and proper. Which is the agency? These days the trend is gaining ground, that for carrying out decentralisation, centralisation is necessary; that in place of many centres of economic power the State alone should concentrate all the powers in its hands; that political power should alone be the effective centre and that it alone should have the monopoly on all means of production. 

Under such a state of affairs, political authority become all-powerful and the entire society is reduced to slavery to the political masters. Only that much of power, which is doled out by the State, will come to the lot of the people. The quantity, the timing, the nature of doling out will all be decided by the rulers. The people will have to be content with playing a second fiddle to the all-powerful State. 

However, the various experiments carried out in foreign countries in this direction have failed to deliver the goods. In the first flush of experimentation they went so far as to plan community cooking and feeding in place of individual homes. They had also experimented with the idea that the children too belonged to the community and not to the individual parents. The infants would be fed and looked after en-masse. At regular intervals, the mother would go and feed her child. But where is the guarantee that the mother would find her own child in that multitude and at so short a time? There is no need even for that. She could feed the child, which she chanced to meet. 

However, after all these experiments they have begun to learn, from bitter experience, that man is not a machine. Each individual has his own special characteristics, his own aptitudes and tastes. When this basic feature of human life was ignored and all were sought to be treated as parts of a lifeless machine, discontent grew. Conflicts ensued. Efficiency fell. And as a result they had to give up such experiments. No doubt, we can admire their spirit of exploration and experimentation. But it does not mean that we too should indulge in the same kind of the futile experiments! 

Will Trusteeship Work? 

We shall now independently and in the light of our own genius ponder over the problem of how best to bring into practice the basic principle of ensuring the just and proper decentralisation of economic power. Mahatma Gandhi has propounded the theory of trusteeship in the light of his perception of the tradition and life-philosophy of this land. In that concept, the human incentive for production is not crippled. He is urged to produce as much as possible. But he is not to look upon himself as the owner of all that wealth; it essentially belongs to the community. He is only to look upon himself as the trustee of that property in order to ensure its proper utilisation in the service of society. 

No doubt this approach is in consonance with our ancient Hindu thought. But there is a serious handicap in this. In the present age, the human mind has been so much confused and twisted out of shape that man is unable to muster his will and capacity for work where he is not able to secure profit for himself. We have to take into consideration this factor also. Take for example income tax. The Government has taxed so high that after a certain slab is crossed the man who produces will be able to retain hardly Rs.2.50 out of 100. Under such conditions the producer would naturally feel that there is no use in producing to that pitch and that a much lesser production would save money for him. Which means he will either begin to put in less effort or indulge in evasion of tax. This has been the experience not only in our country, but elsewhere also. 

The opposite example of West Germany is often quoted. After the Second World War its economy had almost collapsed. And so the economic experts there decided to do away with all the curbs on the incentive for production. All controls were removed. As a result, there was a phenomenal economic growth. Then, they also planned how best to decentralise the wealth. It has been reported that this method has helped West Germany stabilise its economy and march ahead. The experience in industries all over the world is 

also not different. The labourers lose the incentive for work if they feel that they are not able to get suitable recompense. 

Striking a Balance 

So, we have to strike a balance in which the individual’s incentive is kept alive and at the same time decentralisation of the produced wealth is also brought about. For this purpose some restraints will have to be placed on the individual. The concept of personal freedom cannot be so narrowly construed as to harm the interests of the community at large. Freedom of the individual to amass and enjoy the wealth has to be kept within certain limits so as to ensure freedom for all others in the society to have same opportunities for leading a happy and prosperous material life. 

Herein comes the genius of the Hindu viewpoint, which prepares the individual’s mind for this adjustment. He is educated and enlightened with regard to the true nature of happiness: the goal that is kept before him is not merely of physical enjoyment; that is not going to give him lasting happiness. For that he has to rise beyond his dependence on the physical objects, plunge into the depths of his own being and discover that eternal and boundless ocean of joy and bliss. He will then realise that the people around him are also manifestations of the same Spirit and that the enjoyment of the fruits of his labour by them is equivalent to his own enjoyment. 

It is against the background of this life-attitude that a balance could be achieved. The individual could be assured of his right to property, which would enable him to meet the needs and responsibilities with regard to himself and his family. There should be some limited right to property (coupled with a ceiling on personal income) i.e., scope for fulfilling his desires for enjoyment to a limited degree, while at the same time stipulating his contribution towards fulfilling the needs of the other members of the community. Well, these could from the broad outlines for a pattern of economy, which could, in the present circumstances, ensure both the individual incentive and a just system of decentralisation. 

Basis of Success 

However, basic to the success of this system is the proper moulding of human attitudes. People should be imbued with the right philosophy of life. They should be able to check their self-centred propensities and be able to identify themselves with the joys and sorrows of their fellow beings. The spirit of self-discipline which alone will bring about this harmonious adjustment and co-operative effort for the all-round development of national prosperity is also to be inculcated. Thus, the building up of such a social structure in which the individuals are imbued with the right perspective regarding the supreme goal of their life, with love and affinity for the entire society and spirit of self- discipline, becomes the one great mission of every son and daughter of this soil. 

## V. Call of our National Soul 

Revival, not reaction- Culture, indefinable yet all-absorbing- Nation as God- True spirit of service- Not rights but duty- Unity in diversity- To raise the average- Present perversions- Watering roots of immortality 

Our concept of Hindu Nation is not a mere bundle of political and economic rights. It is essentially cultural. Our ancient and sublime cultural values of life form its life-breath. And it is only an intense rejuvenation of the spirit of our culture that can give us the true vision of our national life, and a fruitful direction to all our efforts in solving the innumerable problems confronting our nation today. 

But these days, rejuvenation of culture is often dubbed as ‘revivalism’ and ‘reactionary’. Revival of old prejudices, superstitions or anti-social customs may be called reactionary, as that would result in fossilisation of society. But rejuvenation of eternal and ennobling values of life can never be reactionary. To dub it as reactionary merely because it is old only betrays intellectual bankruptcy and nothing else. By the term "rejuvenation of our culture" we mean the reanimating in our lives of those eternal life-ideals that have nourished and immortalised our national life all these millennia. 

Too Fine to be Defined 

People sometimes ask, "How do you define Hindu culture". Well, we feel it, though we cannot define it. There are some who deny it altogether merely because they cannot define it. They say, "What is the use of a thing which we cannot define?" But will this argument stand to reason? For example, the entire course of medical science is evolved in order to protect life. But even the most modern scientists have not been able to define what ‘life’ is. But that has not come in the way of the utility of medical science. The outward manifestation of ‘life’ and its impact on man is sufficient to convince us of its actuality. 

So also, our sentiments, ideals and aspirations have a reality of their own and have a very vital role in our life even though they cannot be expressed in terms of definitions and mathematical equations. In fact, it is such subtle factors that form the real human personality rather than such gross things as can be measured and defined. 

Truth Defies Denials 

Our culture too, though defying definition, has left its indelible stamp on all walks of our life. We can recognise the element of culture in all such manifestations. There is an example in the life of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. He used to view the problems of life mainly from the materialist standpoint. Things like God, religion, soul, transmigration of soul etc., had no meaning for him. Then a time came when unfortunately his wife, who was taken abroad for medical treatment, died. According to our custom her body was 

cremated-not buried, but cremated. It was reduced to a small handful of ashes. What was to be done with it? An agnostic must say, "This is merely ash and its only profitable use is to put it in the field as manure". According to materialism there is no point in showing any consideration to mere ash". Dust thou art and to dust thou returnest" is all that it can say. 

There was an intense tussle in Pandit Nehru’s mind-between the agnostic in him calling upon him to throw away the ashes in that foreign land and return, and the call of his ancient Hindu blood urging him to bring those sacred relics of his beloved wife and offer them in the bosom of Gangamata. Finally the ancient samskars won. The ashes were brought to our land and immersed at the holy confluence of Ganga, Yamuna and the invisible Saraswati at Prayag. As Pandit Nehru himself said later, his intellect, his modern education and training were all in revolt but something in him, something inexplicable, forced him to immerse the ashes in the Triveni-sangam. This is samskar, the imprint of culture. 

What then are the manifestations of that culture in our national life? 

The Living God 

The first and the most fundamental aspect is the urge for realisation of the Supreme Reality permeating the entire Universe-whatever the name given to it. Or in simple words, it is ‘to realise God’. But where is God? How can we know Him? How does He look? What are His appearances, His attributes, that we may meditate upon Him and realise Him? The description that He is nirakar (without form), nirguna (without attributes) and all that leads us nowhere. Various ways of worship are also evolved. People go to temples and try to concentrate on the idols taking them to be emblems of the Almighty. But all this does not satisfy us who are full of activity. We want a ‘living’ God. What is the use of a God who only hears but does not respond? These emblems neither weep nor smile nor show any reaction, unless of course of the persons are devotees of any reaction, unless of course the persons are devotees of extraordinary high merit. But for all ordinary persons they are non-feeling emblems of the Almighty. Therefore we want a ‘living’ God which will engross us in activity and invoke all the powers that reside in our being. 

Our forefathers therefore said, "Our People are our God". Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, one of the greatest teachers of mankind, said, ‘Serve man’. His great disciple Swami Vivekananda also stated the same emphatically. But ‘man’, in the sense of the whole of humanity, is a very wide concept and as such, cannot be grasped easily as a single solid entity for us to see and feel. Therefore it is that so many who took up the idea of serving humanity ended in inanity and inaction. Hence our forefathers, understanding the limitations of the human mind and intellect, said, "Humanity and all that is all right, but before one can rise to that stage, one should take a view of the Almighty with certain limitations as it were, which one can understand, feel and serve". The Hindu People, they said, is the Virat Purusha, the Almighty manifesting Himself. Though they did not use the ‘Hindu’, it is clear from the following description of the Almighty in Purusha Sukta 

wherein is stated that the sun and moon are His eyes, the stars and the skies are created from His nabhi (navel) and 

czkgk.kks·L; eq[keklhn ckgw jktU;% d'r%A Å: rnL; ;n oS';% inH;ka 'kwnzks vtk;rAA 

(Brahmin is the head, King the hands, Vaishya the thighs and Shudra the feet) This means that the people who have this fourfold arrangement, i.e, the Hindu People, is our God. 

True Spirit of Service 

This supreme vision of Godhead in society is the very core of our concept of ‘nation’ and has permeated our thinking and given rise to various unique concepts of our cultural heritage. 

That vision inspires us to look upon every individual of our society as a part of that Divine Whole. All individuals are therefore equally sacred and worthy of our service. Therefore any sense of discrimination amongst them is reprehensible. Thus, in our culture, the spirit of social service has been sublimated into worship of God. 

There are millions of human beings all around us who live in hunger and destitution, deprived of even the barest necessities of life, and whose stories of misery will move the stoniest of hearts. It is verily God who has taken those forms of the poor, the destitute and the suffering. What for? Does He want anything? He is the very embodiment of all power, all knowledge, and is the Master of all. Then what is it that He wants? He comes in those forms to give us an opportunity to serve Him. Sri Ramakrishna Paramhamsa called them Daridra Narayana (destitute God) 

Once our life becomes soaked with this true spirit of service, we will feel that all our individual and family possessions, however abundant they may be, do not really belong to us. There are only the means to worship God in the form of society. Our whole life will then be an offering in the service of society. The Upanishads say : 

bZ'kkokL;fena loZa ;fRadap txR;ka txrÃ rsu R;äsu Hkq×thFkk ek x'/k% dL;fLon /kueÃA 

(God permeates all Creation. Whatever is left over by Him, after offering Him, enjoy only that much. Do not rob what belongs to others) 

Let us therefore acquire maximum of material wealth so that we can serve God in the form of society in the best possible manner. And out of all that wealth, only that minimum should be used for our sake the denial of which will hamper our capacity for 

service. To claim or to make a personal use of more than that, is verily an act of theft against society. 

In Bhagavata Narada says : 

;kon fHkz;sr tBja rkor LoRoa fg nsfgukeÃ vf/kda ; ̈·fHkeU;sr l Lrsuks naMegZfrAA 

(Take whatever is essential for bodily sustenance. To take more is an act of theft and deserves to be punished) 

Thus we are only the trustees of society. It is only when we become trustees in the true sense that we can serve society best. Such a pure attitude of service will leave no scope for ego or self-adulation. 

Duty in Place of Right 

Today we hear everywhere the clamour for ‘rights’. All our political parties too are rousing the ego in our people by constantly speaking of their ‘rights’. Nowhere is there any stress on ‘duties’ and the spirit of selfless service. The spirit of co-operation which is the soul of society can hardly survive in a climate of assertion of egocentric rights. That is why we are finding conflicts among the various component parts in our national life today, between the teacher and the taught, the labourer and the industrialist, and so on. It is only by an assimilation of our cultural vision that the true spirit of co-operation and consciousness of duty can be revived in our national life. 

Our Cultural Prism 

One more peak of the Himalayan vision of our culture, which none else in the world has so far aspired to climb, is the spirit of ,da lr foçk cgq/kk onfUr (Truth is one, sages call it variously). There is no equivalent expression in English to convey this beautiful sentiment. The word ‘tolerance’, which is often used to express this idea is very meek, it is just another word for sufferance. It implies an element of ego, which just tolerates other viewpoints without any love or respect for them. But our training has been one of respecting and even accepting other faiths and viewpoints as so many paths to reach the same truth. 

It is like the various descriptions of a hill by persons who have gone by different routes to the top. One man says that it appears like a single colossal rock, another says it is all forest and no rock, the third says it is full of shrubs and so on Everyone is correct, though imperfect. The sum total of all such imperfect descriptions give us a complete and perfect description of the hill. One by two or one by three is a fraction. But by adding up all such fractions it is possible to get a whole number, an integer. 

In the same manner, individuals, though imperfect, when merged into a corporate whole, can give rise to a perfect society. And therefore, the superficial difference born out of the imperfections of the individuals are only indicative of the diverse manifestations of the one great and perfect and mighty reality-the society. This appreciation of the inherent spark of Truth, of Divinity in every individual, has penetrated into our various components and spheres of life-religious, social, political and economic-and fashioned them for a harmonious pattern of mutual goodwill and respect. This catholicity of spirit is an altogether unique contribution of our culture to the world thought. 

Raising the Average 

It is only when we revive these sublime features of our culture that our people in general will be inspired by the true vision of our national life so as to break their present shell of personal and family and other parochial considerations and rise high in character, service and sacrifice. A nation cannot rise on an average of dwarfs with only a few extraordinary personalities standing as giants amidst them. To be endowed with extraordinary qualities is the good fortune of a few. We bow down to such souls, and having bowed down to them, still we, the average men, ask the questions of ourselves, "What about us?" Such exceptional lives may give us courage. But sometimes they also depress us with the thought that we are all on the ground unable to rise to such glorious heights. What is the way out? 

A comparative study-even by the foreign historians and travellers of those days-tells us that the average man of this country was at one time incomparably superior to the average man of the other lands. The obvious reason was that sustaining and strenuous efforts had been kept up by the leaders of our society to inculcate cultural samskars in all strata of society. That is why we find great saints and heroes coming up from all sections of our people right from those given to learning and knowledge down to peasants, weavers, cobblers, scavengers and so on, whose thoughts and deeds, songs and sayings have inspired the whole of our people, crossing all superficial barriers. 

Present ‘Awakening’ 

Today, the utter absence of this correct cultural perspective has landed our people in an endless scourge of problems-all stemming from the common source of the low level of the average man. We often hear that there has been a great awakening, a growing political consciousness among our people. Awakening is knowledge and knowledge is the capacity to realise unity in diversity, to find harmony in place of conflict, and to worship society in the place of self. The tendencies of fission should therefore disappear giving rise to urge for unity. If, on the other hand, we do not work for the unity of our people but exploit the various problems to create more factions, then we are not progressing from ignorance to knowledge but only sinking into greater depths of ignorance. 

But then, what is the meaning of so much of activity, so many movements and agitations going on all around us? Well, living beings even though struck unconscious still exhibit 

activity. For instance, we can see through a microscope the blood flowing in the capillaries of a frog even when deprived of external consciousness. Is it ‘progressing’? No! On the other hand it is dying. Similarly, even at the peak of ignorance, activities do take place. A casual look at the motives that inspires most of our present-day activities is sufficient to convince us that they are not born out of real awakening, i.e., knowledge, but out of darkness and ignorance. 

Purge Present Perversions 

When we speak of our sublime cultural values, persons steeped in the modern Western civilisation think that it is something mysterious, something otherworldly. That only shows the present depths of our mental slavery, which has deprived us of even the capacity to grasp those principles, which were once the glory of our national life. Once a friend of mine had borrowed a book from me. On the day he was to return it a monkey took it away. It sat on a tree-top, held it this way and that (probably it had observed my friend doing that!), opened and closed it several times and finally came back and, to my friend’s amazement, kept it back on the table and went away, probably thinking that the doings of human beings were all mysterious and secret! Something similar is our condition today regarding the teachings of our culture. 

The other extreme that we witness today is to identify singing and dancing, cinemas and dramas with culture. We find such ‘cultural programmes’ going on everywhere in our country. Culture has verily become another name for cheap entertainment. This has gone to such a ludicrous and humiliating extent, that notorious filmstars wallowing in depths of moral depravity are included in our cultural delegations to foreign countries! Such persons going about as the cultural representatives of a land that has produced a Rama and a Sita, and has sent as its cultural ambassadors great seers and philosophers in the past and a Vivekananda and a Ramatirtha in the modern times, who commanded the spontaneous love and adoration of the whole world, is a lurid reflection on our present degradation. 

We also see many of our leading ‘cultural men’ associating themselves as judges in the ‘Miss India’ beauty contests. It seems, in their concept of our culture, of the ideal of our womanhood, a Sita or a Savitri, a Padmini or a Nivedita has no place. In that contest, indeed we miss the real beauty of India! 

Silent or Secret? 

We have to rid ourselves of these present-day perversions and assimilate the eternal and life-giving essence of our culture. Obviously this is a work of imparting cultural samskars, which has to take place in an atmosphere free from public fanfare and propaganda and go on silently and steadily day after day and year after year. But today, in the absence of the real perspective of our culture, silence is often mistaken for secrecy. Our culture does not advocate exhibitionism. For instance, the Hindu husband and wife do not display their love openly. The Hindu wife does not express her love through tears, embraces or screams. The Westerners, on the other hand, show their love through dramatic embraces and kisses. This is mostly an outward show-as there is the danger of their divorce the very next day! Our men do not indulge in exhibition but their face will be aglow with love. And that love continues forever without the fear of any break. Our culture has always taught us that restraint of emotions is more potent and charming than extravagant demonstration. If our way of expressing love is considered as dignified, then the silent method of working is also dignified. 

Watering the Immortal Roots 

The work of rejuvenating these ancient and life-giving features of our culture has assumed a new urgency and paramountcy not only in our present national context but in the international context as well. Our cultural vision which furnishes the true basis for love and harmony between man and man and embodies a complete philosophy of life needs to be effectively presented to the present-day war-torn world. If we have to succeed in this great world mission, we have to first set our own standards. We should shake ourselves free from the mental shackles of foreign ‘isms’ and foreign ways and fleeting fashions of modern life. There can be no greater national humiliation than to be a mere carbon copy of others. Let us remember that blind imitation is not progress. It only leads us to spiritual subjection. 

However, we believe that the present perversions and misconceptions are only a passing phase. Our cultural roots are too firm and too deeply struck into the spring of immortality to be easily dried up. They are bound to assert their age-old vigour and vitality and throw out the parasitic growth of the past few centuries and sprout forth once again in all their pristine purity and grandeur. 

## VI. For True National Glory 

Our unique concept of glory – Fourfold achievement – Dharma for individual development and social solidarity – Materialism end in misery - What made us world teachers – Organised strength for attaining and maintaining glory – Right men for organisation 

Our one supreme goal is to bring to life the all-round glory and greatness of our Hindu Rashtra. In order to have a correct grasp of this goal, we should understand what exactly this "great glory", param vaibhavam as we call it in our Prathana, connotes. Then we have also to understand how to attain and maintain that glorious condition of our nation. 

Ordinarily, the glory of a nation is measured in terms of its material affluence. There is no doubt that a nation in glory has necessarily to be in affluence. All the necessities of life must be fully provided to every individual in the nation. But, is that the complete image of our national glory that we conceive of? This is an all-important question which we have to ponder over. 

Our Vision of Glory 

Each nation has its own key-note in life and marches ahead in tune with that national ethos. Our Hindu Nation has also preserved a unique characteristic since times immemorial. To us, the aspects of material happiness, i.e., artha (the amassing of wealth) and kama (the satisfaction of physical desires) are only a part of man’s life. Our great ancestors declared that there are two more aspects of human endeavour, dharma and moksha. They built up our society on the basis of this fourfold achievement, the chaturvidha purushartha of dharma, artha, kama and moksha. Since hoary times our society has been known not merely for its wealth and affluence but more so for the other two aspects of life. We are therefore called a highly moral, spiritual and philosophical people, who have kept as their ultimate goal nothing short of direct communication with God Himself, i.e. moksha. If this final aim of human existence is left out, then what remains except the feeding of the brute in man? If it is a fact that there is a difference between man and the animal, then the concepts of prosperity and happiness for the two also must differ. If to eat, drink and enjoy abundantly is the only criterion for both, man will have to be equated with a mere beast. Therefore we say that we have also to feed the spirit of man. It is only when we do that, that we can look upon our national existence as being really great and glorious. 

So, when we think of the greatness and glory of our nation, we not only think of its wealth and affluence, of all the means of satisfaction of the necessities of the body but also of the mind of the individual which should be made to gradually rise above all these things and place him in a position to which he is entitled as a human being, that is, in 

direct relation with divinity. It has been said, /kekZnFkZÜo dkeÜo] that is, first follow 

dharma, and dharma will also give artha and kama. 

Role of Dharma 

When we say that we want to protect and rejuvenate dharma, do we mean the revival of its external form of rituals and formalities? In our country, some people wear the sacred thread – yajnopavita – while some do not. Some keep a tuff of hair, some do not. Some worship idols, some do not. These things have meaning for those who have faith in them. And they are just small external signs of our all-comprehensive dharma. They must not be confused with dharma itself. 

Our definition of dharma is twofold. The first is proper rehabilitation of man’s mind; and the second is adjustment of various individuals for a harmonious corporate existence, i.e., a good social order to hold the people together. 

Let us take the first aspect. What is meant by the rehabilitation of mind? We know that the personality of man is only a projection of his mind. But the mind is like an animal, which runs after so many things and it is so constituted as to be one with all the desired things. Ordinarily, man’s mind does not stop to consider what is right and what is wrong. It stoops to any level in order to fulfil its desires. With such a mind, man is not likely to rise higher than the level of an ordinary animal. Therefore the mind is to be cultivated in self-restraint and certain other great qualities. Those attributes of good conduct are mentioned in various contexts in the Bhagavad-Gita and our other holy scriptures. They have described five yamas for the body and five niyamas for the mind. 

The other is the social aspect. Man’s life has to be attuned to the wider interests of the people as a whole. Both these aspects are complementary to each other. The first aspect is defined as – 

;rks·H;qn;fu% Js;lflf}% l /keZ%A 

which means that the arrangement which enables and encourages man to control his desires and create within himself the competence to realise the Divine Essence or the Eternal Reality even while enjoying a rich material life, is dharma. The second aspect is - 

/kkj.kkr /keZfeR;kgq % /kekZs /kkj;fr iztk %AA 

which means that the power which brings individuals together and sustains them as a society is called dharma. A combination of these two definitions shows that the establishment of dharma means the building of an organised social life wherein each individual has realised his oneness with others in society and is imbued with a spirit of sacrifice to make others’ material lie richer and happier, and develops spiritual strength which leads to the realisation of the Ultimate Truth. 

There is no more way of looking at this blending of the development of the individual with the integrity and welfare of the society. We have been told by our great thought- givers to discriminate between what is permanent and what is impermanent. Shankaracharya has called it nityanitya-vastu-viveka. Let us, for the time being, keep apart its high philosophical interpretations and apply to our national life. Individuals come and go. Countless generations have come and gone. But the nation has remained. Drops of water come, stay for a while and evaporate; but the flow of the Ganga goes on ceaselessly. So is the eternal flow of our national life. We, the individuals, appear on the surface like bubbles or drops for a moment, and disappear. The 'permanent’, therefore, is the national life. The ‘impermanent’ is the individual. The ideal arrangement would therefore be to transform the impermanent-the individual-into a means to attain the permanent – the social good – which would at the same time enable the individual to enrich and bring to blossom his latent divinity. This is dharma in its twofold aspect, which leads mankind to its ultimate goal of Realisation of Godhead-moksha. 

The Present Warnings 

Unfortunately, the persons at the helm of affairs of our country today have lost this national vision and become infatuated with foreign ‘isms’, which have not risen beyond the materialist view of prosperity and glory. They have given currency to the slogan of ‘raising the standard of life’, which only means increasing man’s desires and trying to fulfil them by increasing physical comforts and conveniences. The luxuries of today become the necessities of tomorrow and thus goes on the endless struggle for more and more satiation of man’s desires of the flesh. 

It is a matter of common experience that physical desires can never be satiated. The more one attempts to satisfy them the more intense they grow, even as fire blazes instead of going out when oil is poured into it. Tolstoy has written a very instructive story under the title "How much land does a man need?" A peasant was promised free all land he could run round from sunrise till sunset. In his sheer greed to cover more and more land he ran so far that he never got back to the starting place before sunset, and in utter exhaustion he died. Only a strip of land, seven by two and half feet, was needed to bury him! 

It is also well known that a person who has a bundle of unsatisfied desires can never be happy in spite of any amount of multiplication of the means for their satisfaction. In America, for example, in spite of its boundless affluence and prosperity, the incidence of various sorts of heinous crimes and mental diseases in all strata of society is growing at an alarming rate. Millions of Americans drug themselves every night with sleeping pills before going to bed. This only betrays a serious lacuna in their philosophy of life. Having kept the political and economic factors as the sole and supreme consideration in life, they have ignored the roots of spirituality which alone restrain and ennoble the human mind and nurture the human soul to grow and blossom in peace and happiness. 

In Practice 

Let us not, therefore, forget that it was the complete life-concept of chaturvidha purushartha that marked out our society and made our name shine bright on the horizon of the world. Our national past bears ample testimony to the fact that this life-concept was not just a Utopia but a living reality for thousands of years of our national life. All the foreign travellers who visited our land have vouchsafed for the supreme quality of man attained here in addition to limitless wealth and affluence. The sublime character of our people was a result of the complete life-concept – the harmonious blending of artha and kama with the higher values of dharma and moksha – that we had worked out on the individual as also on the national plane. 

History records countless examples of other countries bowing down to our nation in utmost veneration because of the sterling character of our spiritual giants who strode all over the world to carry the message of divinity in man. Later on, our Buddhist monks and missionaries too who crossed the borders and reached distant lands were revered and their examples and teachings set up as standards in all those countries. A disciple of Buddha had gone to Tibet, China and Japan. His idol was actually worshipped as God in these countries. How did this miracle happen? It was the intense spirit of self-sacrifice and service, the all-embracing love, and the sheer merit of noble character of such missionaries that made them the cultural preceptors of these people and earned the name Vishwa Guru – World Teacher – for our Bharat. 

The need for emphasising this aspect in our national life today becomes all the more evident when we find our people going out to other countries whether as ambassadors or professors, as students or businessmen or merry-go-travellers, cutting sorry figures in those countries, wallowing in physical pleasures, behaving no better and many times even worse than those people. 

Our real national regeneration should therefore start with the moulding of ‘man’, by instilling in him the strength to overcome human frailties and to stand up as a shining symbol of Hindu manhood embodying within himself our traditional virtues of love, self- restraint, sacrifice, service and character. We should unfailingly keep this vision, this real essence of our glorious nationhood, before our eyes so that we can again rise to our original pedestal of the world preceptor. 

The Sanction 

Now, we come to the second aspect of the question. In the present-day world, what should we do to attain and maintain that highest pinnacle of national glory, resplendent with its fourfold achievement of life? We know that such a glorious condition stands in danger of destruction either by internal disorders or external aggressions. Our own history tells us that both the factors have been responsible for bringing us down from a state of glory, that was once the envy of the world, to the present despicable condition. Today, therefore, we have to rebuild our national life so that we will be able to ward off both these dangers. 

It is well known that in this age, especially, the strength to protect ourselves from external aggression and internal chaos lies in the organised life of the people.- la?ks 'kfDr% dykS ;qxs Therefore, when we say that our nation should be taken to the pinnacle of glory, it also means that the people should be made alert, organised and powerful. After all, nations can stand only upon the solid foundation of their organised strength. Other aspects of life such as food, clothing, shelter, medicine and other physical requirements, however necessary are only secondary. The first and foremost prerequisite is the invincible organised life of the people without which even the highest national prosperity will crumble to dust in no time. 

Weak Links Do Not Make a Strong Chain 

Let us now look for the source of such a strength. Where does it reside? We say, it lies in the organised life of the people. But, what type of people? They should be such as are imbued with unity of mind and thought, bound together with a common code of morality and faith in each other, and filled with absolute loyalty to the nation. Unless they are such, their organised strength is not likely to protect the nation. On the other hand, it may prove to be a menace to national life. (For example, selfish and antisocial elements and even thieves and dacoits get themselves organised). 

We also find that it is easier to gather together selfish people without character for purposes, which are detrimental to social welfare. Today, such groups having their own sectarian or other narrow interests are coming up throughout the country. In order to satisfy their selfish interests they are even prepared to destroy the sanctity and unity of our national life. Such persons can come together very easily. That is the lowest stratum of organised life. In the lower strata of life, organisation is very simple, very easy. A whole flock of crows assembles if we just throw a piece of flesh. That is the herd instinct. This instinct comes into play, when wider grasp of national life is lost sight of and narrow concepts of sect, creed, caste or some such things reign supreme in the mind. But we should not take to this line simply because it is easy. 

Therefore, we conclude that organised strength has to be built up by the bringing together of proper persons. Then, what are the qualities required of individuals who will form the living limbs of such an organised strength? 

Strength is Life, Weakness is Death 

The first thing is invincible physical strength. We have to be so strong that none in the whole world will be able to overawe and subdue us. For that, we require strong and healthy bodies. All our Incarnations who came in the human form have been such. The essence of our scriptural message has been ‘strength is life, weakness is death’. Swami Vivekananda used to say, "I want men with muscles of iron and nerves of steel". He himself was like that. Finding that some co-disciples were always sitting down and shedding tears, he would thunder, "That is not bhakti. That is nervous weakness. Don’t sit down and weep like little girls". 

What do we see today when we look at ourselves in a mirror? Do we find any sign of manliness and strength? Don’t say, "What is there after all in a body?" Our shastras say 

'kjhjek|a [kyq /keZlk/kue 

(Body is the primary instrument for fulfilling our duties in life) Without an able body, we cannot achieve anything. Even to see God, a healthy and strong body is required. God is not for the weak: 

uk;ekRek cyghusu yH;%A 

When we sit to meditate upon God, if our head begins to reel, our back begins to ache and we begin to quail and shiver in our own seat, then the result is no God, but only fever! The present-day fashion of our young men of decorating the skin and and discarding the sinews must be given up and they should, with proper exercises and healthy habits, develop strong bodies capable of resisting heat and cold, hunger and exertion and of undergoing all the hardships of life with good cheer. 

Character is All 

Physical strength is necessary, but character is more important. Strength without character will only make a brute of man. Purity of character from the individual as well as the national standpoint, is the real life-breath of national glory and greatness. 

There is the story of Prahlad which depicts the importance of character. As a result of his meritorious deeds, he drove away Indra and became the king of gods. Indra approached Brihaspati-the guru of gods – and said, "Sir, you know my pitiable plight. What shall I do to regain my throne?" Brihaspati said, "Dress yourself as an ordinary mendicant, go to the durbar of Prahlad at the hour of Ichhadan, i.e., when he gives away whatever the beggars ask, and ask for his sheela(character)." Indra obeyed. He went to Prahlad as a beggar and asked him his sheela. 

Prahlad said, "Why are you satisfied with only my sheela?" "That is sufficient for me," replied the mendicant. "You can have it", said Prahlad. Immediately after he said this, an effulgent being came out of his body and entered the body of the mendicant. "Who are you? Why are you entering the body of the mendicant leaving my body?" asked Prahlad. "I am your sheela. As you have given me away to him. I have to enter his body now", the effulgent spirit replied. In a fraction of second another brilliant form came out. Once again Prahlad asked "Who are you? Why are you leaving my body?" I am your shaurya (prowess). I am only a servant of sheela. So long as you had sheela I served you. Now that sheela has gone away, I am also following sheela." So saying, it also entered the body of the mendicant. Like this a few more effulgent forms left Prahlad’s body. Lastly, a brilliant shining form of woman came out of him. She said, "Well, I am your Rajyashree (Goddess of Royal Glory). I too am a servant of sheela. As you have given up your 

sheela, I am going." As a result, Prahlad lost all his power and glory and Indra regained his throne. 

The moral of the story, in a nutshell, is that if endowed with character we can achieve anything, and without character we stand to lose everything. This is as much true of nations as of individuals. Therefore, the two aspects of character, individual and national, are like the twin lungs of national glory. 

Robust Common Sense for Success 

Now, suppose we have a strong body and a pure and devoted heart. But, how to use the body and the mind? For that, we require intellectual acumen capable of grasping the realities and intricacies of the situation and deciding one’s right conduct. We should therefore develop power of concentration, sharpen our intellect and acquire the power to pitch upon the right action at the right moment. And we should also be prompt and dynamic in acting up to decisions. 

Without such practical wisdom, all our goodness and strength will be of no avail. Many a page of disaster in our past history was a result of the want of robust common sense. Let us not forget that the path of national reorganisation is not a bed or roses. And without sagacity, mere sincerity will not avail us when faced with knaves and crooks. One need not be an ‘intellectual’ to achieve skill and wisdom in the practical world. Even persons in the common strata of society can cultivate such wisdom. There is the example of one of our workers, an ordinary unlettered farmer in a village, who could guide and control ten to fifteen surrounding villages even during critical situations. He could also give proper guidance to the village elders in all walks of life. Each one of us should rouse within ourselves the conviction that ‘I am born with living seeds of wisdom, which, if properly nurtured, shall surely take me to success’ and strive to live accordingly. 

Fearlessness 

Suppose we have a strong body, purity of character, a keen intellect, but no fortitude, what is the use? All the time, circumstances are not going to favour us. We shall have to face obstacles and adversities. Fearlessness is the first virtue of a hero, the starting point of all other noble virtues. Even in the Gita, the enumeration of the various godly qualities starts with abhayam (fearlessness). Our founder, Dr. Hedgewar, used to say that the work of national consolidation should proceed in such a way that it neither frightens anybody nor will be afraid anybody: 

Ukk Hk; nsr dkgwdks uk Hk; tkur vki 

All our ideal heroes have been the embodiment of fearlessness and fortitude. A large army headed by Khara and Dushana came to attack Rama. Dust was seen clouding the sky. Seeing the enemy approaching, Rama said to Lakshmana, "Sita is not accustomed to all these things. You stay here protecting. I will finish these fellows and come back." So saying, he went alone with the bow in his hand. Sita trembled to see him going alone. 

Then Lakshmana said, "What of this fourteen thousand, he is capable of destroying the entire army of Ravana single-handed. Be at ease." After annihilating the rakshasas, Rama came back as though nothing had happened – cool, quiet and unruffled as ever. 

The spirit of heroism is necessary even to worship God. A coward cannot do it. In jnaneswari, it is said that when a person sits to mditate upon God he will see terrible forms, and if he is a chicken-hearted fellow, he will be simply undone. Nothing can be achieved by cowards, either in this world or the other. If we are on the right path, there is no reason to be afraid of anything. 

One of our workers died some years ago. I met him a week before he died. He told me, " No treatment seems to have had any effect upon me. I have no hopes of recovery. I feel I am dying soon." I said to him, "You have served a great ideals selflessly and untiringly. You have done no harm to anyone and have always been doing good to all. Why then should you be afraid of death? Rejoice and meet death peacefully!" And he did face death with peace and tranquility. Such a spirit of fearlessness born out of the conviction that we are doing good, that we are on the right path, will take us a long way in achieving our ideal. 

First Loyalty – to Ideal 

That is not all. We need an urge to develop in ourselves all these qualities. Intense devotion to the ideal that we have place before us, will give us the necessary urge to equip ourselves with all the great qualities required for achieving the glory of our nation. 

Duty to Country First 

There may be occasions when conflicts arise in our mind while fixing priorities among our several duties. Then we will have to discriminate, take a detached view and respond to the supreme call of the ideal that we have chosen for our life. The martyrdom of Tanaji Malasure is a shining example in this regard. When Shivaji sent word to him and assigned him the challenging task of winning the formidable Kondana fort (later called Sinhagad), Tanaji was busy making preparations for his son’s marriage. But at the word of Shivaji, Tanaji gave up the thought of the marriage saying, "My son’s marriage may well wait for some time; I will first carry out the command of my king. My first duty is towards the Swaraj". Without a moment’s hesitation Tanaji proceeded to conquer Kondana. The heroic attempt was crowned with success, but it claimed as its price the life of Tanaji himself. 

It is when we bend all our energies towards this fundamental process – the great process of man-making – that our ancient and sacred nation can once again attain its original position of greatness and glory, shedding peace and plenty, culture and character all- round. 

## VII. Live Positive Dynamic Hinduism 

The indefinable ‘Hindu’ – Aim : God Realisation – Special features – Our unique standard-bearers – Need to manifest ideals in daily life – Effects of ‘reactionary Hinduism’ – Role of daily samskars – Fad of modernism – Hindu ideals in all spheres – Live National Swadharma 

When we say that the Sangh is dedicated to the rejuvenation of the great and unique Hindu way of life, there are many who confront us with the question, "First of of all, how do you define a ‘Hindu’?" Well, it is really a tough job. Once a gentleman remarked "I can define a ‘Mussalman’ or a ‘Christian’, but I cannot define a ‘Hindu’." He was right when he said so. We can define the Sun and the Moon, but the ultimate Reality from which all these things have emerged cannot be defined. But does it mean that it does not exist? Merely because it refuses to be clothed in symbols and defies definition, does it prove Its non-existence? Sri Ramakrishna has said that God alone is "anuchhishtha", pure and undefined, because He alone has never been described, never been defiled by any tongue. Everything else we can define, but not that all-comprehensive something called Reality. 

The Indefinable Hindu 

We, the Hindus, have based our whole existence on God and therefore, it is probable that the Hindu Society has developed in an all-comprehensive manner, with a bewildering variety of phases and forms, but with one thread of unification running inherently through the multitude of its expressions and manifestations. All the sects, the various castes in the Hindu fold, can be defined, but the term ‘Hindu’ cannot be defined because it comprises all. Of course, many attempts at definition have been made from time to time, but all such definitions have proved to be incomplete. They do not express the whole truth and it is but natural in the case of a people who have been growing and evolving for the last so many scores of centuries. 

The origin of our people, the date from which we have been living here as a civilised entity, is unknown to the scholars of history. In a way, we are ‘anadi’, without a beginning. To define such a people is impossible, just as we cannot express or define Reality because words came into existence after the Reality. Similar is the case with the Hindu People. We existed when there was no necessity for any name. We were the good, enlightened people. We were the people who knew about the laws of nature and the laws of the Spirit. We built a great civilisation, a great culture and an unique social order. We had brought into actual life almost everything that was beneficial to mankind. Then the rest of humanity were just bipeds and so no distinctive name was given to us. Sometimes, in trying to distinguish our people from others, we are called ‘the enlightened’ – the Aryas – and the rest Mlechhas. When different faiths arose in foreign lands in course of time and those alien faiths came in contact with us, then the necessity for naming was felt. Various names were given at different times, just as the Ganga is called Gangotri, Bhagirathi, Jahnavi and Hooghly at different stages. And the name ‘Hindu’, derived from the river Sindhu, has been associated with us in our history and tradition for so long that it has now become our universally accepted and adored name. 

Life with Aim 

So, here we are, Hindus, though defying all definitions, all the same a reality. The Hindu Society is a living reality which all of us feel and experience in every drop of our blood. But though we cannot define it, we can and must be able to appreciate the special features which mark out the Hindus as a distinct people. We cannot say that merely because a particular individual is not a Muslim or a Christian, he is a Hindu by the process of elimination. In our country, the Hindu is often referred to by political leaders as non- Muslim. That is not a healthy, positive way of understanding our real nature. Hindu is not a negative being. What, then, is the positive content of that word? 

To a Hindu, life is not without an aim. That aim is not one of greatness measured in terms of power, position, name or fame. The realisation of his true nature-the innate Spark of Divinity, the Reality in him-which alone takes man to the state of everlasting supreme bliss, is the one great aim before him. But man has only a short span of life. How can he reach that supreme stage within such a small period? He does not know fully even about his own body even though he uses it throughout his physical existence. Then, how can he know that which is an immanent in the body? The law of cause and effect says that each action of ours – the cause – has its effect. The circle of cause and effect has to grow, develop and culminate. As such, the present existence of man cannot comprise the whole story of his real being. Since the distinctive natural urge in man is to expand and express his diving nature, he will be born again and again so long as the least trace of ignorance of his true Divine Self remains, and in every birth he will be able to make further progress if he makes honest efforts. 

This theory of rebirth for the realisation of our oneness with that Ultimate Reality is the one great hope for the human soul. It is the lighthouse of Hinduism alone which sheds this light of immortal hope that all is not over with this present life, that there is eternal time before us to put our shoulders to the wheel, life after life, and reach the destination. It is the Hindu alone, in the vast mass of humanity, who holds aloft this torch of hope and confidence. All our holy scriptures, all our sects, old or recent, have these fundamentals ingrained in them. 

Serve ‘Man’ 

With this, we go forward. We are living in this world. We are surrounded by innumerable worldly charms and distractions. Probably we may not, even for once, think over the real aim of life. Then, how are we to conduct ourselves so that we may be able to progressively realise, during the course of our life, our real nature and not degenerate into further and further ignorance thus dragging ourselves down in the scale of evolution? The law recognises that if a man commits a harmful act, without, however, any evil motive, his fault is less. Sometimes he is even supposed to be absolved of all his sin. If we, 

therefore, act without any selfish motive, do things out of a sense of duty, i.e., if we take out the personal attachment from our action, the motive of personal enjoyment therein, then the various actions and their fruits do not affect us. Then we are completely absolved from the effects and shocks of the external world and we will be able to concentrate on our True Self. So, our philosophy says, do your work, do your duty in a selfless spirit. 

Now, what is the nature of the work we have to do? What is the nature of our duty? From where are we to begin and how are we to lead our life so that we may reach that Ultimate Reality? Is it possible to do it by merely proclaiming that there is something which is called Reality, which will in course of time automatically manifest Itself? No! We must be able to see its objective manifestation in this objective world, something concrete, something living which we can feel and experience and through which we will be able to complete the process of realisation. Our philosophers have placed ‘man’ as that objective manifestation of Reality, as the object of worship and service. They declared, "Like ourselves, every man is a spark of the same Reality. Let us try to identify our joys and sorrows with an ever-increasing circle of men, expand thus our being and ultimately realise the Great Reality pervading the entire universe". 

What, then, is the arrangement that makes it possible for every one of us to serve ‘man’, each according to his stage of evolution? 

Man does not live alone. He shuns solitude. He is gregarious by nature. So, human beings come together and live as social beings in the form of society. Thus he can live well, develop, and manifest the best in him. He can thus rise in the social rung and progress towards the fulfillment of the aim of life. It means that the building up and maintenance of a social order capable of affording each individual full opportunities to identify himself with wider and wider social groups and serve society with all that he possesses, is the best way for lighting up the path of every individual towards the realisation of the Ultimate Truth. Therefore, we have said, "Let us serve society without any selfish ambition or selfish attachment". Service to humanity is verily service to God. This has been a special feature of our philosophy of life. 

Our Models 

With this ultimate aim always before our eyes, it was natural that throughout our history we have laid great store by the qualities of head and heart conducive to the welfare of humanity rather than the amount of earthly riches that one possesses. The richness of heart, the purity of mind and the nobility of character have always been the touchstone of our values of life. The standard of greatness with us has always been one’s inner, and not one’s outside, possessions. All outer things come and go. Why should we run after those fleeting objects? We opted for a wealth which is the unique treasure of human life, which we can develop within ourselves – the wealth of sound virtues, of perfect knowledge and of sublimity of the soul. That alone is real, that alone is abiding. Therefore, whereas the general mass of people in other countries have worshipped a great military hero or a mighty chieftain, we find in our land that even the great heroes and monarchs have worshipped the dust of the feet of half-naked sanyasins living in forests without a piece 

of cloth to call their own. Why? Because our way of looking at life, because of our realisation that the quality of the inner being alone is abiding and that it goes from life to life till it reaches the culmination of perfection. 

Be Living, Dynamic Emblems 

These are just a few basic features which go to make us real, positive Hindus. It is only when we pay special attention to them, imbibe them, manifest them in our life, and stand up as real, living and dynamic emblems of those glorious concepts that our taking birth in the divine Hindu heritage will not have been in vain. 

Can we, then, say confidently that we are such real, positive Hindus? Let us ask ourselves. How do we live? What are the ideals before us? What are our feelings? Are we Hindus only by the force of circumstances or by ‘accident of birth’? Or because we have remained untouched by conversion to Islam or Christianity, as the proselytisers were very few and we were very large in numbers? Is that the only meaning of our being Hindus? There is no use merely saying "Oh! We have a great culture." What do we know of it? How do we practise it? Do we look at our individual life as an offering to society? Do we feel that we should not merely run after pelf and power but should hold aloft virtues in life? Do we feel that we should really be such men that as soon as anyone looks at us, he must be able to say, "Here is a man, who is seeking perfection in all that go to make a real human being?" Let us introspect on these lines and gradually assimilate all these distinctive Hindu traits so that we can stand before the world as positive, dynamic Hindus. Let us live up to our philosophy, our dharma, and all those great qualities, which have moulded our lives for countless generations. 

Therefore, though the idea of organising the Hindu Society may appear to be very simple, it really means that first of all we should be keenly conscious in our day-to-day life of our Hindu heritage and should mould every little aspect of our life in keeping with those great traditional values. In all that we do, in our dress, in our behaviour and in all walks of our life, that stamp of positive conviction should be vividly manifest. This is the prime responsibility that rests upon us. 

Reactionary Hinduism 

But, unfortunately, what do we see all around us today? Some are Hindus, not out of conviction, but out of reaction. To give an example, our workers once approached a prominent Hindu leader during the signature collection campaign demanding ban on the slaughter of cows. But they were greatly shocked to hear him saying, "What is the use of preventing the slaughter of useless cattle? Let them die. What does it matter? After all, one animal is as good as the other. But, since the Muslims are bent upon cow-slaughter, we should make this an issue. And so, I give you my signature." What does this show? We are to protect the cow not because the cow has been for ages an emblem of Hindu devotion but because the Muslims kill it! This is Hinduism born out of reaction, a kind of ‘negative Hinduism’. 

There are some for whom, the term ‘Hindu’ is of use only to serve political objectives. Because a Congressman or a Socialist or some ‘X’ thinks in terms of ‘composite culture’, they stand up and say that they want a ‘pure’ Hindu culture. Stranger than this is the cry of ‘Hindu Communism’! A person can either be a Hindu or a Communist. He cannot be both. It only means that those who shout about ‘Hindu Communism’ know neither Communism nor Hinduism. This is all out of reaction. Once a gentleman asked me whether we are organising Hindus in order to counteract the various activities of the Muslims. I simply told him that even if Prophet Mohammed had not been born and Islam had not come into existence, we would have taken up this work just as we are doing it today, if we had found Hindus in the same disorganised, self-forgetful condition as at present. The positive conviction that this is my Hindu Rashtra, this is my dharma, this is my philosophy which I have to live and set up as standard for all other nations to follow- well, this should be the solid basis for Hindu reoorganisation. 

If, then, we are not to be mere ‘political Hindu animals’ or Hindus out of reaction, we must live as Hindus by conviction, capable of expressing that conviction in all aspects of our day-to-day life. The mere propagation of Hindu thought in literature and newspapers takes us nowhere. For instance, Veer Savarkarji wrote a beautiful book ‘Hindutva’ and Hindu Mahasabha based itself on that pure philosophy of Hindu Nationalism. But once, the Hindu Mahasabha passed a resolution that Congress should not give up its ‘nationalist’ stand by holding talks with Muslim League but should ask Hindu Mahasabha to do that job! What does it mean? It only means that the hybrid nationalism of Congress was of the pure variety, whereas Hindu Mahasabha represented the Hindu counterpart of the rabidly communal, anti-national Muslim League! How did this strange perversion set in? Because, the deep-rooted conviction which would spontaneously evoke the ready affirmation "yes, this is Hindu Nation" under all conditions, even in dreams, was not there. 

Things that Count 

So, we say that we have to imbibe deep and positive samskars of our nationhood which shall not allow us to be swept off our feet by political or other considerations. It is no use to speak of Hindu Nationhood and the eminence of Hindu way of life without a corresponding life-pattern in our practical day-to-day behaviour. 

One of our ancient customs is to get up early in the morning before sunrise. Once a sadhu described to me his early childhood, how his mother used to get up early in the morning and, while doing the normal household duties, would be reciting in her melodious voice various hymns describing the glory of the Divine Mother of the Universe, and how she would awaken him with words invoking Her holy blessings. The Sadhu said, "Those holy words which I used to hear immediately after I woke up from my sleep went deep into my being, purified me, gave me faith and strength to resist all worldly temptations and devote myself to the service of the Mother". This is Hindu samskar. Let us thus mould our life with an attitude of discipline throughout the day, from morning till night. A Hindu is born to be trained in a life-long course of discipline and self-restraint, which purify and strengthen him to reach the Supreme Goal in life. 

Let us not say that these are small things about which we need not worry. It is only such little things that go to discipline our life and give shape and strength to our character. 

But, unfortunately what do we see at present? All such benevolent customs and codes of conduct are ridiculed as superstition. A revealing incident took place recently. A student had gone to America from our country. He stayed as a paying guest in one of the ordinary families there. On the first day, when he sat for meals at the table along with the members of the family, he immediately started serving himself. Then the lady of the house gently requested him to wait for a minute and explained that it was their custom to pray to God before taking food. Remember, that young man had gone from a land which is considered to be a land of spirituality, a land of God, to a land which is supposed to be a land of Mammon worship, a land of gross materialism. There is no doubt that it is this faith in God, this faith in religion that has given to the West, to a large extent, the strength to succeed in this world. 

"Modernism" 

We pride ourselves upon our spiritual tradition. But how are we actually living? What are our daily samskars? Is there any place for God in all our daily routine? Is there at least some place in our homes where we can contemplate upon Him? Once an acquaintance of mine invited me to visit his newly built house. It was a well-furnished and in every sense a ‘modern’ house. When he had finished showing me its special features, I just asked him, "Well, where is the devagriha? Have you no family deity, which your forefathers had worshipped and handed down to you?" My question came as a surprise to him. He replied apologetically, "Yes, yes, but I had forgotten all about it". After a few months, when I had gone to that place again, he specially invited me to his house saying that he had carried out my suggestion. I went there. He showed me a small almirah constructed in the triangular space under the staircase and all the chappals and shoes – quite a number of them because their ‘standard of life’ was quite high! – of the family members neatly arranged over that almirah! He said with a sense of gratification, " I have just constructed this and kept our family-god here". I was horrified to see that. I only remarked, "Why not keep these chappals inside and worship them instead of defiling the deity?" Such is our ‘modern progressive’ Hindu life! 

Let us not forget that a Sri Rama, a Shivaji or a Vivekananda was not a product of this type of ‘modernism’. Shivaji was inspired by the ideals enshrined in a Ramayana and Mahabharata. It was his supreme devotion to our Hindu way of life coupled with his unparalleled organisational acumen which gave it a practical dynamic form, that made him a force which changed the entire course of our history. Right from the Vedic seers down to Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, Ramatirtha and such other stalwarts of the modern age, all have left the impress of their inspiring personality on our people by their life of positive love and realisation of our age-old ideals. They could stand erect in spite of all adverse forces, speak to the world in challenging tones. To what a pitiable condition we, their children, have descended! We do not know even the a,b,c of the ideals which moved and moulded those heroic souls. 

I know a young man who had gone to a foreign land on Government scholarship. There he was confronted with a number of queries by his friends and strangers about atma, pranayama, Gita and so many other Hindu ideas and ways of life. This young man was blissfully ignorant of all those things. He wrote to me about his difficulty. But what could I do? Could I give him postal training in yogabhyasa, in samadhi, in pranayama and in all such things? How humiliating, it is, that our so-called educated young men of this land do not have the least scent of the fundamentals of our own philosophy – let alone their realising them in full! 

Ideals in All Aspects 

Then, let us look into the other aspects – the aspect of our relation with the various spheres of contact with society, as for example, our family, our neighbourhood, our centres of education, our field of profession and so on. Has there been no distinctive contribution of the Hindu in all these spheres of life? On the contrary, it is the Hindu alone whose philosophy embraces the smallest as well as the widest spheres of human activity. To us, the family is the first stage of our self-expansion. Then, all the various duties that devolve upon us as family members, have to be gone through so as to keep the delicate ties of sweet affection and identity among the members of the family always in tact. As a son, as a brother, as a husband or in whatever relationship, let us uphold the noble Hindu ideal of a family man. It brings no credit to us if we say, "Oh, I am working for society, why should I bother about the family bonds?" Again, look at the great ideal characters of our land. Sri Rama, though in his teens, accompanied Vishwamitra to the forest to destroy the rakshasas according to the bidding of his father. Later, he gladly started for his fourteen years of forest sojourn only to preserve the sanctity of his father’s pledge. As a brother, what an intense affection he bore towards Lakshmana and others. He was an ideal son, an ideal brother, an ideal husband, an ideal friend, an ideal disciple and to his foes an ideal enemy too – all blended in one ideal Hindu manhood. So was Sri Krishna. What a source of joy and solace he was to Yashoda and Nanda! How he charmed the whole neighbourhood with his sweet behaviour! 

Then, during our student life, acquiring knowledge and character, and not merely stuffing our brains with information, has been the constant urge with us. We are not to become mere bookworms. The one key to all learning is concentration of mind. With regular healthy habits for the body and for the mind, it should not be difficult for us to develop concentration. And then, in various educational institutions in which we study, we come in contact with our teachers and co-students. In the Hindu tradition the relationship between the teacher and the taught is not one of contract. It is something sublime – the shishya looks up to the guru as the very embodiment of knowledge and divinity and behaves towards him in a spirit of humility and devotion. 

Immediately this is said, there are today some who ask whether the present-day teachers are worthy of such devotion. But the students should not fall a prey to such a perverted outlook. Let us behave as we ought to; it is for our own good, for our own refinement. We worship the idol of Hanuman in the temple. After a time, by constant application the idol is thickly covered with sindhur and its shape is changed beyond all recognition. But 

still it is worshipped as Hanuman with the same devotion. The Deity of Learning is Vinayaka – the Deity with a pot belly and an elephant head! But that does not affect one’s devotion to Him. See the born Jagadguru Sri Krishna behaving like any ordinary pupil in the hermitage of Sandipani, and you get the true picture of an ideal Hindu student. He served his teacher with utmost love and devotion just like any other pupil. He went to forests in rain and storm to bring dry faggots for yajna. What was there for him, who was himself the very embodiment of knowledge, to learn? 

And again, see him moving among his comrades and co-students. What a deep and pure love he had for all! Sudama, a poor Brahmin boy, was his classmate in Sandipani’s ashrama. Later in life, when Sri Krishna’s fame spread far and wide, Sudama once set out with torn clothes and a handful of beaten rice to see his old classmate. As soon as Krishna sighted his old friend he dashed forth and warmly embraced him to his bosom. He snatched the precious present that his friend had brought and ate it with great relish. He conferred upon Sudama immense riches also. 

Even if, by chance, there is a conflict with our elders on points of ideology, our respectful behaviour towards them need not change. In the Mahabharata war, when Bhishma and Arjuna faced each other, Arjuna directed his first five arrows to the feet of Bhishma. The charioteer of Bhishma was amazed to see Arjuna’s unfailing arrows falling at Bhishma’s feet instead of striking his chest. Bhishma said "My beloved Arjuna is prostrating before me with all his five pranas seeking my blessings". 

"Swadarme Nidhanam Shreyah" 

Let us not brush aside these examples as old puranic stories. In them are embedded the priceless gems of our culture, which once made the Hindu life the envy of the whole world. Nor are they to be discarded as having become impractical in these days. Even in this twentieth century, we do see such inspiring examples. There is the example of our own founder, Dr. Hedgewar. When he had once gone to Poona in connection with the organisational work, one of his old teachers at Poona was also invited to the elders’ meeting to be addressed by him. Many a leading light of the city had assembled for the meeting. The old teacher came a bit late. But as soon as Doctorji saw him, he got up and touched the old teacher’s feet and offered him his own seat. 

These are only a few features of our present-day living on the background of our permanent values of life. It is only when a nation, just as an individual, sticks to its roots of swadharma that it grows and blossoms forth in all-round glory and achievement. Pulling out one’s roots of swadharma and transplanting something else in its place will only result in utter chaos and degeneration. The Bhagawad-Gita says : 

Lo/kesZ fUk/kUk« Js;% ij/ke ̈Z Hk;kog% AA 

(Even death while performing one’s own dharma brings blessedness; taking to another’s dharma is fraught with fearful consequences) 

The task of rekindling the Hindu way of life brushing off the ashes of self-forgetfulness and imitation covering the immortal embers of the age-old samskars in the Hindu heart so that pure flame of the National Self of this sacred land will once again blaze forth in all its effulgence, therefore, comes up before us as the call of National SwadharmaThe task of rekindling the Hindu way of life brushing off the ashes of self-forgetfulness and imitation covering the immortal embers of the age-old samskars in the Hindu heart so that pure flame of the National Self of this sacred land will once again blaze forth in all its effulgence, therefore, comes up before us as the call of National Swadharma 

## VIII. VISION OF OUR WORK 

Short-cut mania – Lure of politics – Warning of history – Secret of our undying potency – Inspiration for national rejuvenation – Power corrupts – Restraints on power – Effects of combination of political and economic powers – Lesson of Europe – Sangh building people’s power – Upholding national genius. 

The ultimate vision of our work, which has been a living inspiration for all our organisational efforts, is a perfectly organised state of our society wherein each individual has been moulded into a model of ideal Hindu manhood and made into a living limb of the corporate personality of society. 

Obviously, this is not a vision which can be realised within a few days or even a few years. It requires the untiring, silent endeavour of hundreds and thousands of dedicated missionaries. It requires stout and steady hearts, which shall remain unshaken amidst adversities and temptations. It is to mould such inspired lives that the Sangh lays utmost stress on day-to-day samskars, day-to-day inculcation of all those qualities of head and heart which go to foster strength and competence in the individual to march on the path of lifelong dedication. 

The Short-cut Mania 

This type of steady, silent and lifelong devotion to work may appear very strange and unusual in the present-day world. It has an originality and a freshness all its own. As such, people will naturally take some time to appreciate and assimilate this approach of ours. For instance, there are many who feel aghast at the idea that our method of work demands daily attendance at a particular hour, at a specified place, year after year, all through their lifetime. Once a young man requested me to guide him how he could develop his powers of concentration. In order to test his tenacity, I asked him to observe a particular practice regularly. Immediately he asked, "For how long am I to do this?" I said. "Well, continue it for all life". He exclaimed, "For all life! How is it possible to continue anything for all life?" I jocularly asked him, "At least will you stick to this principle all your life?" 

That is the mentality of the day. People want quick results and short-cuts to success. This human frailty of ‘minimum effort and maximum result’ has encompassed all fields of our national life. The path of honesty, which implies sincere, hard labour has yielded to means, foul or fair, which give quick results. The earning man thinks in terms of such short-cuts to become rich; and if he can become so overnight, he is prepared to descend to any level for that sake. He takes to black-marketing, speculation and gambling. He eagerly catches hold of an astrologer to see if any planet can do something for him! Stealing and robbing are, of course, there – as the right royal short-cuts! 

People have also begun to look out for short-cuts in realising God! Who will take all the trouble of undergoing lifelong penance and single-minded pursuit of God? They try to get hold of some saint or sanyasin as an intermediary agent who, they believe, will take over all their sins, give them his merit and leave them clean and pure to face God! No aspect of our social life is free from corrosion by this mean and ignoble attitude. 

The Suicidal Lure 

Because of such an atmosphere all around, people begin to think whether there are such short-cuts in the Sangh work also. They ask, "How long do you intend to carry on like this? When will you be able to bring about the total transformation of society that you visualise? For how many years more will you go on plodding the same path?" Then, they look around and see the mighty Government wielding vast powers and encompassing the whole expanse of national life. They begin to imagine that invested with such resources in administrative personnel, finance and authority, they can, within a short time, change the entire face of the country, and mould the coming generation on the pattern they desire through education and so on. They become enamoured of that short-cut involving less sacrifice and quick result. To a superficial view, this argument, no doubt, appears very attractive. The all-out stress that is being laid on the political and economic aspect of our life by the present Government, the incessant propaganda carried on for their Five Year Plans, and the opening up of ever new fields of government control to suck up the young men of the country, have all added their share to the present-day attitude of our people to look up to political power as the panacea for all our ills. 

But let us not be carried away by such a superficial view. Let us educate the people to acquire a deeper understanding of things, though unfortunately shallow thinking has become the order of the day. Once in Nagpur, there was an All India Education Conference. Some of the leading luminaries, who had come there were known to me. They told me about the details of their proceedings and the rules, curriculum, etc. they had decided upon. At last I asked them a simple question, "Can you tell me the real nature and real needs of the ‘individual’ in our country whom you are planning to educate?" One of them confessed straightaway that this question was never posed before them. That is how things go on in our country, as in the story of the blind leading the blind, no one desiring or striving to get at the root of the problem. 

Let us open the pages of world history and see if such a superficial view, such a short-cut means of state power will really help to build an immortal national life of a country. There were in the past so many empires pivoted wholly on political power. Persia, for example, entirely depended upon its emperor for all its security and prosperity. The emperor was the supreme head and controlled all aspects of people’s life including their religion. The people were for a time carefree and happy. But their entire national edifice crumbled at the very first shock of the Arab invasion. The same fate overtook the empires of Rome and Greece. It was not as if these empires had no wealth or good administration or armies. But all those things rested on the sandy foundation of the political authority of the king and as soon as that political power was shattered even for a while, all their civilisation, their religion and their nationalism came down along with it in a crash, never to appear on the world stage again. Countries after countries lost their soul to Islam and became Muslim countries for ever in this fashion. 

Secret of our Immortality 

But the story of our nation presents an entirely different picture. Our society also had to face innumerable such invasions from the most barbaric races. Even political domination by these hostile forces over our people continued for a time, sometimes for several centuries. Off and on, forces of adharma reigned unleashing all their powers of destruction right from the days of Ravana. In that dark hour when Aurangzeb ruled, even a great martial saint like Samartha Ramadas was constrained to lament that an Incarnation of the Almighty alone could save Hindu Society from total annihilation. Later on, the wily Britishers also tried his hand at subverting our national life. Even today adharmic elements are having their heyday. But our society has survived all these grave crises. Again and again it has risen from the ashes, smashed the stranglehold of the evil forces and established the reign of righteousness. That glorious tradition continues unbroken to this day, charged as ever with the idealism and energy of resurgent nationalism. How did this miracle happen? What is the secret of the immortality, this deathless potency of our society, even after it was infected with the deadliest of poisons? 

It is at once clear that the basis of our national existence was not political power. Otherwise, our fate would have been no better than that of those nations, which remain today as only museum exhibits. The political rulers were never the standard-bearers of our society. They were never taken as the props of our national life. Saints and sages, who had risen above the mundane temptations of pelf and power and had dedicated themselves wholly for establishing a happy, virtuous and integrated state of society, were its constant torch-bearers. They presented the dharmasatta. The king was only an ardent follower of that higher moral authority. Many a kingship licked the dust owing to various adverse and aggressive forces. But the dharmasatta continued to hold the people together. 

Ravana was a shrewd aggressor. He knew this secret of our social coherence. He was aware that the life-centre of our society throbbed in the forest hermitages of sages and seers. Therefore, he concentrated his attacks on those jungle huts, on the sacrificial rites that were carried on there. But those spiritual heroes braved those onslaughts and stuck to their mission of rousing and integrating the people. The whole of society and, it is said, even gods were groaning under the heels of Ravana. Then the nation roused itself in the personality of Sri Rama. That great saviour was moulded and guided by sages like Vishwamitra, Vasishtha and Agastya. Not only was Sri Rama set up, but intense national consciousness of the whole of society was kept ablaze by these sages through regular discourses, discussions and various dharmic rites. How alert, how diligent were these ‘half-naked faqirs’ in their devotion to the welfare of society! Finally, even the deadly missile with which Sri Rama slew Ravana was given to him by the sage Agastya. It was because of their inspiration and untiring efforts that those lashing tides of adharma which had engulfed the ‘three worlds’ were ultimately laid low. Once again society rose ever more effulgent from the ashes of Lanka, the citadel of those adharmic forces. 

The Tradition Continues 

The Buddhist Age too has the same message for us. After Buddha, his followers here degenerated. They began to uproot the age-old national traditions of this land. The great cultural virtues fostered in our society were sought to be demolished. The links with the past were hammered away. Dharma was at a sad discount. The whole social fabric was being rent to shreds. Devotion to the nation and its heritage had reached such a low pitch that the Buddhist fanatics invited and helped the foreign aggressors who wore the mask of Buddhism. The Buddhist sect had turned a traitor to the mother society and the mother religion. In such a critical moment, who was it that came up as the redeemer of our dharma and our society? 

It was the same tradition of sages and seers that projected its power and vitality in the form of Sri Shankaracharya. He was a sanyasin, an incomparable philosopher and an unique organiser. His eminence lay not in any earthly wealth or power. Half-naked, he roamed on foot from one end of the country to the other. Countless were the dangers he had to encounter including attempts at poisoning him. But he moved from place to place, fearless and conquering, knowing no rest or comfort, and once again rekindled the ebbing flame of our ancient culture. The band of his devoted sanyasin followers cemented with their blood and sweat the past with the present for a glorious future. The true national consciousness and selfless service that they roused, helped society to find its feet once again and throw out the treacherous elements. Buddhism, as a distinct sect, was erased from the mother soil, though of course, Buddha remained as an Incarnation. We worship Lord Shiva, no doubt, but on that account we do not welcome the flock of demons surrounding him. 

Even during the days of Muslim domination great saints and sanyasins rose to continue that tradition. All those stalwarts – Chaitanya, Tulsidas, Surdas, Jnaneshwar, Ramananda, Tukaram, Ramanuja, Madhwa, Nanak and a host of such others – flooded the land from one end to the other with religious devotion. Samartha Ramadas converted that religious fervour into a dynamo of national power. They recited stories of Sri Rama and Sri Krishna, sang the divine ballads of their heroism, roused the people’s faith in their gods and goddesses and kept up their moral calibre unimpaired amidst all the political oppression. The great national renaissance under Chhatrapati Shivaji was the direct outcome of those years of intense spiritual and cultural awakening. Prior to that also, the glorious Hindu power of Vijayanagar rose on the spiritual-cum-national awakening set in by Swami Vidyaranya. The great religious Guru Nanak and his successors laid the foundation of the Hindu upheaval exhibiting itself in the warlike Sikhs under Guru Govind Singh and Banda Bairagi. Thus, once again, the great national consolidation centered round dharma and the vicious, anti-national forces were put to rout and the flag of national victory flown triumphantly from Attok to Cuttack and from Kashmir to Kanyakumari. 

We see the same spiritual content present in the national resurgence against the foreign yoke of the British also. The spiritual sun broke forth in all its glory in Bengal as the Sri Ramakrishna-Vivekananda order, in the Punjab in the form of Swami Dayananda and 

Ramatirtha, in the South Maharshi Ramana and Yogi Aurobindo – all of whom infused the spiritual content of nationalism in to the people’s mind. 

This is the unmistakable evidence of history before us. We have to take a lesson from that and decide to build the organised life of our people imbued with pure character and unflinching devotion to cultural and spiritual values, which shall stand unshaken for thousands of years to come. The power of the organised life of the people imbued with the spiritual urge of our ancient heritage – well, that has been the secret of our immortality down these ages. That is verily our Rashtradharma and we stand committed to rejuvenating it in its full potency. 

Here it is necessary to clear a misconception that has clouded our thinking these days. When words like dharma and spirituality are uttered, pat comes the remark : "Why do you bring religion into politics?" This question stems from a misunderstanding of our concept of dharma and confusing it with the Western concept of religion. The Western countries suffered for centuries because of their dogmatic concept of religion and the control of state by the church. Our concept of dharma is as different from that as cheese is from chalk. Dharma or spirituality is not a dogma but a view of life in its totality. It is not a separate sphere of national life just as political or economic spheres Spirituality is, in our view, a comprehensive vision of life that should inform and elevate and correlate all fields of society for the fulfilment of human life in all its facets. It is the sap of our national tree, the life-breath of our national entity. 

Power Corrupts 

Even after understanding all this, there are some who feel that political power is essential even to spread our dharmic ideology . In the past, Christianity and Islam, they say, spread far and wide because of the political power they wielded. But on a closer study, we will find that ultimately political power will never solve the problem. For instance, the Government and most of the people were ranged against that single individual, Jesus Christ. After he was crucified on the cross, his disciples had no one to guide them. But their hearts were charged with idealism. Fired with the spirit of Christ, with the faith and zeal of their new realisation, they spread far and wide in the world. And the world bowed at their feet. Then they had no political power. But when, in course of time, their successors fell a prey to the lure of political power, corruption and degradation entered their ranks. The present plight of Christianity, rendered powerless to mould the life of it own Christian countries and even made a tool in the hands of imperialistic political powers, is the direct outcome of the pollution of their ranks with political ambition. The perversion of Islam at the hands of its power-drunk followers – miscalled the spread of Islam – is too well known. It had nothing to do with the awakening of the spiritual values of life. 

Why go so far? The present leaders of Congress were at one time men of great sacrifice and patriotism. The people also were inspired to follow the path of virtue because of their glowing examples. But what is their fate today? Corruption, nepotism and lust for power have become rampant in their ranks. That is why Gandhiji had advised Congress on the 

advent of swaraj either to disband itself or strictly keep itself aloof from power. But his wholesome advice was too bitter a pill to swallow for his followers who had tasted the spoils of power. And today we see its dire result, not only for Congress but for the whole country as well. 

The latest experiment in Russia to achieve social good through the sole agency of state power has also given the same verdict. The statement "power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely" has become true to a letter there. Once power is acquired, the desire to retain it at all costs takes hold of the persons who wield that power. Their attitude towards the people will then be one of "I am the master, and you are my slaves". That is what has happened in Russia. Revolutionary zeal, wealth and power and its resultant intoxication, have all combined to make it a ruthless dictatorship, enslaving and dehumanising a whole nation. 

Considered from this other aspect also, we come to the same conclusion that the type of organisation that we are building – keeping ourselves aloof from lures and tentacles of political power, but at the same time alert and powerful enough to check the erring powers that be – can alone give a healthy and permanent order in which our society can live and prosper. After all, political power is an external appliance, which cannot by itself mould the ‘inner man’ after an ideal. Mere governmental legislation cannot mould the minds of men on the lines of virtue. If a person in authority legislates, say, against drinking and if he himself is given to drinking, he will only show greater cleverness in circumventing that very law. 

Thus it is very clear that mere political authority becomes powerless when it has to play the role of rejuvenating the cultural values and social solidarity; and much worse, if left to itself, it corrupts those high standards. The secret of immortality of a nation conserving the noblest of its traditional qualities has to be sought elsewhere; and the functions of the state would have to be specified and its powers restrained within certain limits. 

Restraints on Power 

It is with such a deep understanding of the various factors of social life that our ancient lawgivers confined the function of the state to the protection of the people against foreign invasions and internal strifes caused by jealousy, hatred, aggrandisement, etc. A state, which transgresses these limits, they said, cannot be the friend of the people. It becomes their enemy. For, it will not allow the free growth of the eternal potentialities of the people. That would also degrade them by making them relegate to the background the higher values of life, in a bid to please the powers that be. 

Today our Government, calling itself a ‘Welfare State’, is trying to centralise all power and authority and secure undivided control of education, medical aid, social reforms, production, distribution and many other spheres of life. If the state were thus to dominate the whole range of human activity, the individual will exist only as a slave bereft of all initiative. It is well known that power tends to make its wielder oppressive and tyrannical. Men in authority, therefore, strive to suppress their potential opponents through violence, 

thereby rendering themselves incapable of securing the peaceful progress and welfare of the people. Our lawgivers, therefore, though it is necessary to impose strong checks on the men in power. They ordained that governmental power, which is only a means, should not become the end. The state could do good to society only so long as it remained as the upholder of dharma – the higher law of the good life – and not as an end in itself. They, therefore, placed our rulers under the guidance and control of the dharmic authority in the form of selfless and disinterested persons-the sages and seers living in hermitages. 

One more unique feature incorporated in our ancient national set-up was the precaution taken to keep political power aloof from the production of wealth. Money is a form of power. It does not need much intelligence to imagine the havoc the state can create once it becomes inflated by a combination of political and economic powers. Concentration of both these powers in the hands of the same individual or group must either degrade and enslave society or provoke the people to revolt when their suffering becomes unbearable. Whatever the outcome, the loss of social stability, progress and prosperity becomes inevitable. 

The Lesson of Europe 

The example of European countries is revealing. Prior to the French Revolution, the king was the repository of all political and economic powers in those countries. The people were groaning under the despotic kingship, squeezed out of all liberty, initiative and happiness. The French Revolution erupted with the trumpet cry of ‘liberty, equality and fraternity’ as a violent revolt against that tyranny. By about the same time, the Industrial Revolution had also set in. Under the slogan ‘equality of opportunity’, persons with greater intelligence, capacity and money monopolised the industries, amassed enormous wealth, and on that strength controlled political power as well. They became the new tyrants in place of the old. The combination of political and economic powers once again bred despotism and the common man was reduced to conditions of indescribable misery and slavery, though under the new and enchanting garb of democracy. As Bernard Shaw observed, democracy was born as a result of the absence of a benevolent despot. 

This imbalance in social set-up and the consequent popular unrest caused another outburst in the form of Communist revolution. The bloody revolutions that took place in Russia and China have probably no parallel in the history of the world for their sheer magnitude of massacres, purges, transportations, slave camps and such other inhuman measures. Again, the same tragedy of the combination of political and economic powers has overtaken the Communist countries landing the general mass of people in inhuman slavery. Countries, which have forestalled the Communist revolution and remained democratic could do so by weaning away to some extent at least the political power from the clutches of economic power. However, even in these democratic countries, a beneficial balance between the two has not been achieved so far. 

Therefore in order to avoid slavery or bloody revolution and provide enduring peace and freedom to society, our ancient Hindu thought and practice had kept economic power 

away from the hands of the state. It deprived the people producing wealth of all political power. The two powers were thus kept interdependent and mutually corrective. And above all, these two powers were subjected to the supervision of such selfless men as had no axe to grind. It was the continuous tradition of such persons, holding the sceptre of spiritual authority, who were ever on the alert to undo any injustice perpetrated by any of these two powers, while they themselves remained above all temptations of power or riches, that formed the real breath of the glory and immortality of our ancient nation. 

Building Social Omnipotence 

It is after realising this key-note of our national tradition that we have taken upon ourselves the none-to-easy path of moulding men imbued with an uncompromising spirit of dedication to the nation and its spiritual values, who, on the strength of their all- embracing love and spotless character, will be able to wield the integrated strength of the society to such an intense degree that the political powers that be shall not dare to transgress their limits and use power for ends other than social welfare. An organisation of such men alone can form the true basis of eternal social power-an organisation which can rise above the flux of circumstances, which is not inspired by the aim of serving petty interests or capturing political power, an organisation which is identified with the whole of society, sustaining by its very existence the entire social edifice and providing spontaneous impulse and energy for its full self-development. 

Having, as we do, this sublime vision engraved in our hearts, why should we run after the mirage of political power? Once in the Dakshineshwar temple there was a theft.. Some of the ornaments of the idol of Radhakanta were stolen. When some one made the remark "What is this God who cannot protect His own ornaments?" Sri Ramakrishna rebuked him saying that it was shameful to entertain such absurd views for, what value can He attach to such worthless pieces of stone and metal Who has Lakshmi, the Goddess of Wealth, as his handmaid? Similarly, why should we, who have the integrated vision of the entire national life, run after a fleeting thing like political power? 

Political power shall only reflect the radiance of culture, integrity and power of the organised society that we want to build up-just as the moon reflects the radiance of the sun. We aspire to become the radiating centre of all the age-old cherished ideals of our society-just as the indescribable power, which radiates through the sun. Then, the political power, which draws its life from that source of society, will have no other go but to reflect the same radiance. 

There is a story in the Upanishads, which beautifully expresses this idea. Once, it appears, the gods became swollen-headed owing to their victory over the demons. The Almighty thought it time to subdue their inflated ego. He assumed a colossal body and suddenly appeared before them. The gods were taken aback to see that strange apparition. The god of wind, Vayu, was sent to find out who that figure was. That figure calling himself Yaksha, placed a blade of grass in front of Vayu and challenged him to move it. Vayu with all his world-shaking powers failed to move it even by a hair-breadth. He returned exasperated. Then the god of fire, Agni, went. He also returned humiliated 

having failed to brun that little blade of grass. Finally, the king of gods, Indra, himself went to see him, but that strange figure disappeared all of a sudden. Indra also returned feeling ashamed at his inability to unravel that mystery. Then it was brought home to his mind that the Yaksha was the Almighty Himself through Whose grace each of them received a spark of His power. 

Stick to National Genius 

That is the grand ideal we have envisaged-the building up of the omnipotent power of the people which shall eternally sustain the society amidst all the vicissitudes of external factors and vivify and irradiate all fields of our national life. 

Remember that the ancient spirit is not dead. That race spirit, which has survived all the shocks of centuries of aggression and has time and again thrown up great spiritual and national heroes, is bound to reassert itself. Let us fashion our life on the pattern on those ancient torch-bearers, those cultural luminaries of our land. Let us revive that glorious tradition which produced a Vasishtha, a Vishwamitra, a Chanakya, a Vidyaranya and a Samartha, that blossomed forth in a Sri Rama, a Chandragupta, a Krishnadevaraya and a Shivaji. 

Let us stand like a rock on this conviction amidst all the tempo of outside propaganda for short-cuts and distractions of political lures. Let us remain true to our dream of reinstating our Bharat Mata as the Cultural Guide of the world, by making our people once again take to the path of our national genius. It is only when we stand up to this conviction unshaken like the great Himalayas that holy streams like Ganga and Yamuna of true national resurgence and cultural values will flow from us. Let that sublime vision continue to stir our hearts forever and let us prepare ourselves for that historic mission, regardless of the time and energy that we may be required to dedicate. 

Let us stand like a rock on this conviction amidst all the tempo of outside propaganda for short-cuts and distractions of political lures. Let us remain true to our dream of reinstating our Bharat Mata as the Cultural Guide of the world, by making our people once again take to the path of our national genius. It is only when we stand up to this conviction unshaken like the great Himalayas that holy streams like Ganga and Yamuna of true national resurgence and cultural values will flow from us. Let that sublime vision continue to stir our hearts forever and let us prepare ourselves for that historic mission, regardless of the time and energy that we may be required to dedicate. 