+++
title = "Bethlehem star"
+++

Source: [TW](https://phys.org/news/2025-12-star-bethlehem-comet-ancient-chinese.html)

The Star of Bethlehem might have actually been a comet described in an ancient Chinese text  
by Krystal Kasal, Phys.org

Star of Bethlehem  
Image generated by the editorial team using DALL·E for illustrative purposes.

Many researchers have spent decades attempting to decode biblical descriptions and link them to verifiable historical events. One such description is that of the Star of Bethlehem—a bright astronomical body that was said to lead the Magi to Jesus shortly after his birth.

Although many attempts have been made to link the Star of Bethlehem to astronomical bodies, the unique motion of the "star" did not quite fit any known object. However, a new research study, published in Journal of the British Astronomical Association, describes a likely candidate for the bright object seen above Bethlehem over 2000 years ago—a comet described in an ancient Chinese text.

## Nonsensical motion
The biblical text in question occurs in the book of Matthew and describes a "star," which the authors of the study suggest may be any celestial object. The text says that the star "went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was." The star is described as being in the eastern sky. The study authors meticulously analyzed the context and potential meaning of the story.

They write, "The passage indicates that after the Star appeared to precede the Magi on their short journey to Bethlehem, it reached a position over the town, perhaps overhead near the zenith, where its motion came to a noticeable stop for a period coincident with their arrival."

The Star of Bethlehem might have actually been a comet described in an ancient Chinese text
This is a simplified diagram of a hypothetical interplanetary object ("C") traveling near Earth. The subscripts refer to its position at time steps t1 to t7. For a fixed position ("P") on the rotating Earth, the object would appear to remain stationary directly overhead as a "temporary geosynchronous object" for several hours (t3 to t5). Credit: Journal of the British Astronomical Association (2025). DOI: 10.64150/193njt
Of course, this motion is not typical of most astronomical objects, like stars and planets. Instead, most astronomical objects simply appear to rise in the east and set in the west, due to the rotation of Earth. This led to three interpretations: the story is simply a myth used to make a point and no such object existed, it was an actual miracle or there is a natural (although, rare) astronomical event that explains the motion.

Some researchers held onto the idea that there is a physical explanation. After all, there are some situations where an object might appear to stop temporarily in the sky. In particular, an object that is in geosynchronous motion with Earth will appear to be motionless in the sky. This can theoretically occur with a comet if it is in the right place and moving at the right velocity.

A few different comets have been suggested, such as Halley's Comet, but these did not fit the timing or placement needed for the Star of Bethlehem. And so, the authors of the new study conducted a search of many historical documents to find mention of any other observed astronomical events during the time period.

A potential match
A passage in a Chinese document known as the Han Shu (History of the Former Han Dynasty), caught the attention of the study authors with the mention of a "broom star"—known to be a term for a comet—in the "second month" of the "second year."

"The 'second month' of the 'second year' corresponds to the Chinese lunar month spanning 5 BCE [from] March 9 to April 6, which falls neatly within the estimated window for Jesus's birth. Being visible 'for over 70 days' suggests that the object was likely bright," the study authors explain.

The researchers also say that period fits with the life of King Herod, who ordered a massacre of male children under two years old in an attempt to kill Jesus. Herod ruled Judea as a Roman client king from 37 BCE to 4 BCE.

Simulations were conducted to generate possible comet orbits fitting the observations. The numerical modeling showed that this comet could have passed close enough to Earth in June of 5 BCE, to exhibit the "temporary geosynchronous" motion needed to make it appear to pause overhead for several hours. The best-fit orbit showed the comet would have appeared nearly stationary over Bethlehem for about two hours.

## Positive omens and Magi motivations
The team also asked the question: "How could a comet appearing in Capricornus in March/April of 5 BCE have convinced the Magi that a king had been born in Judea, prompting them to undertake a long journey?"

Discover the latest in science, tech, and space with over 100,000 subscribers who rely on Phys.org for daily insights. Sign up for our free newsletter and get updates on breakthroughs, innovations, and research that matter—daily or weekly.

To attempt to better understand their motivations, the researchers examined ancient astrological and cultural beliefs that the Magi may have been exposed to in order to explain why they would interpret the comet as a sign indicating the birth of Jesus. They found mentions of comets signifying both good and bad omens in both Greco-Roman and Mesopotamian texts.

"A major criticism of the comet hypothesis is that ancient astrologers interpreted the omens associated with their appearance as harbingers of evil, rather than as signs of good tidings such as a new king. However, closer examination of comet omens will show that interpretations of comet appearances were not always negative," the study authors explain.

They found that some omens in Mesopotamian texts could even have been interpreted to link a comet's appearance with events in the royal families of client kingdoms and that it is possible that this influenced the Magi's belief that the birth of a new Judean king had occurred.

Whether or not the comet mentioned in the Han Shu was the same celestial body witnessed over Bethlehem, the study authors say that this study has proven that such an object could exist that would explain the event.

They conclude by saying, "This study shows that it is no longer justifiable to claim that 'no astronomical event' could possibly have behaved in the manner described by Matthew."

Written for you by our author Krystal Kasal, edited by Stephanie Baum, and fact-checked and reviewed by Andrew Zinin—this article is the result of careful human work. We rely on readers like you to keep independent science journalism alive. If this reporting matters to you, please consider a donation (especially monthly). You'll get an ad-free account as a thank-you.

More information: Mark Matney, The star that stopped: The Star of Bethlehem & the comet of 5 BCE, Journal of the British Astronomical Association (2025). DOI: 10.64150/193njt

2025 Science X Network

