+++
title = "tablighi jamAt history"
+++

video source [p1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ia_puSJRxlI). machine transliteration below.

usually when we hear this term secret history the connotation of ten is of a narrative that is either suppressed lost forgotten but somehow not accessible. however i use this term secret history in context of the jammer with a slightly different meaning. secret not because it is suppressed or lost actually history of the earth is pretty much available in plain sight - very easily accessible. however perhaps going by the narrative that have appeared about the math in the recent times due to the attention it has drawn to itself we could see that the narrative of jammers is not properly situated in located in the larger project of islam. that is what we shall try to do in this conversation. 

but let us start from an interesting true story which happened several decades back during the british india time in the molten city of punjab there used to be a wealthy influential reminders whose two sons were studying in a college of lahore the suns disappeared without any trace and for several months neither him nor the police could find where they were then one day suddenly comes to mean carrying news and messages from the boys his boys had skipped college the miller told me that to join an islamic army in afghanistan names you know the rubber near led by a couple of land hours from home the boys were learning more about islam so there's a mean that catches hold off for the mullah beat him up he and his men interrogate him to extract more information and they learn that the mullah has quite a lot of information up his sleeves literally i say literally because when they take out the jacket of mullah they discover that underneath the leaves and the lining of the court had hidden several messages secret messages so once those messages those letters are extracted from the court they find that those are written on yellow silk cloth in black ink and in a very cryptic persian which of course these amanda and his men could make no head or tail so the handover this mullah the letters to the punjab police. punjab police make inquiries and interrogate smaller and then in a sequence of events which would seem to be coming straight from a plot of some sherlock holmes novel of sir arthur conan doyle a much bigger discovery of a plot of all species made. so i said the sherlock holmes and it would be interesting to mention that the last of sherlock holmes novel actually came out just a couple of months before the events of which we speak the valley of fear. 

so the police makes the investigation and they find that these letters are addressed to a very influential person of india of that time very influenced the most influential more learner of that time named muhammad hassan my mouth on her son was the head of the open the mothers of the he was called sheik in the shake off in by his admirers and during this time he was actually living in the letters were written one of the letters was written by another senior mona of durban others are named mohammed abed cindy and the letter was written by the grandson of the founder of durban the mother so on and in these two letters their details given of the entire strategy of  how they wanted to wage jihad on india to tourist listen islamic state and for doing that how they were mobilizing support from across the world especially from afghanistan and turkey and arabia. so of course larger part of a beer was then in turmoil the first world war had just started and as of yet then the turkish ottoman turkish empire was neutral and yet and between british and two months there were a lot of tensions in mecca the sharif of mecca was a kind of supporter of british so they lean on him to get a rest of this no longer hassan made he's arrested not only that there are more than two hundred and twenty five very senior more learners all over india who are named in those letters as the supporters and perhaps party spends in some shape or form in that conspiracy of jihad. they are arrested all over india as well. thus this story unfolded and kind oh nipped in the bud as well. 

a few interesting parts in the story which we should highlight first is if you think that the the occurrence that we often hear about off some young muslims from kerala running away going to afghanistan or syria to fight for isis and think that this is something unique which is happening in india for the first time. that would be far from truth in this story that i just narrated of my mood hasan jihad and how men from different parts of india especially punjab end damn guy email or planes and stay in afghanistan to wage years is a glaring example of the same in fact many of these young muslims who returned and were arrested by the british. they wrote the biographical account of what all went on. one such was published in the in the five by a pakistani person in the in would do the book is called up it gives detailed narration of how very young people who used to be recruited from madrasas and colleges. they used to be trained in warfare sent to afghanistan to fight. 

another interesting thing that we learn from this story is that a lot of times these people used to be new converts to islam. so just like muhammad ali jinnah or the poet allama iqbal who were only second generation converts and who became kind of firm ideological and political generals in the project of creating pakistan. and also just like we hear that some of these killer muslims who went to syria and afghanistan to join isis exeter were actually new converts. in this story itself in fact this mullah that i mentioned - he was a sikh and he converts to islam and not only converts to islam, become similar studies in the urban mother and eventually becomes jihadi. not only him very few people know about this - but third of those three letters was written to him in hyderabad of sin was actually a brother real brother of a famous congress leader achArya JD Kriplani. can you imagine that? the brother of our child i was he had converted to islam and not only converted to islam he became the supply chain runner for the creation of islamic state back then has of which i speak as a matter of fact another of kaplan is brothers was a jihad as well converted to islam and he went so far as turkey to fight in jihad. both of these brothers of money died in combat so that's an interesting thing not many people know about. 

but i think i digress far away from the main point of the story why did we even start with the story because going by all the articles that newspapers ever written didn't even exist back then it came into picture in nineteen twenty five or twenty six they say. so i started with this story for a couple of reasons first of all this event was the beginning of the end of the last time the muslims of india directly confronted the british empire - with couple of exceptions sure  - in the Azad hind fauj they did come back even in in in the same first world war also there were some reports in singapore malaysia etc europe as well but by and large a full fledged jihad against british was not called for after this though. the birth of the jammer and the circumstances which give birth to them ah to do with the failure complete utter failure of this jihad. so that's first reason we'll come back to the circumstances that led to this. 

second the founder of jammer mona mohammed elias can't tell me the great grand father of the current nice indian police is looking for more than a start so this founder of the earth was a direct disciple of the sheikh pull hind, muhammad hassan of durban. this fact is often overlooked i won't say he or suppressed but bypassed and overlooked in most of the biographies of of mahatma gandhi so for example if you read a book on the bleak movement by famous scholar - he does not even once mentions the name of hassan he completely skips him. but if you go through older biographies especially do biographies especially the one written by the famous scholar of the mothers are in luck know if you read his his account of mullah mohammad years - he clearly mentions that the basic education of madonna years in the early days was done at the feet of he was his second teacher in sector is can i use the word guru-bhai but after the death of that co founder of urban he continued to study especially a study that they're busy and these other other released books from my mouth. not only that olivia's biography of muhammad until we clearly says that that founder of the earth muhammad took the vow of jihad in front of this person. one another place in in in this book mere mentions that he was pretty young he was a teenager maybe thirteen or fourteen year old and you'd go to his friend with a stick in hand and you get up let's go and wage jihad - lets fight jihad. so this roots of the founder of the earth to be connected with jihad and actual armed not the so called greater jihad or spiritual jihad jihad which he could fight with the stick is is pretty much there in the roots of the month but not only that at this very time in  nineteen fifteen sixteen these events unfolded when more than a model son was in my car muhammad us until we he was himself present in mecca he is first as he did multiple husbands later but his very first page was at that time when on to a company that very time his masters my son 

so that's another reason i started with that story that the result of all of this was for muhammad the layers to find a new way of of doing something about this jihad islamic supremacy in the revival of islam in. there are several other points that i think important enough for us to understand and especially because those are those are overlooked i think i should add one more aspect of this whole story if you read the history of movements like eighteen fifty seven - gather movement of the times that we speak or even later personalities like a bull farmers than other so called nationalist muslim freedom fighters the impression is given by the narrative of is that they were nationalist patriotic indians who happened to the muslims. and usually they are kind of given space out of proportion plea to peddle this story of a nationalist indian nationalist muslims but if you scratch the surface very little - you discover the reality was quite different. the motive behind any of this spectrum of muslims with few exceptions i acknowledge them too - but with very few exceptions, the rest of the spectrum of these people who fought british worse to establish islam as a as a poll and for them and khilafat that is the islamic global islamic state was the primary motive to fight the war locally in india as well. and it's unfortunate that even the literature created by staunch hindus even leaders such as sAvarkar some at some places they fail to recognize this fact. so for example in this book written by a car eighteen fifty seven he is the first one this was written in early parts of nineteen hundreds when he was hardly twenty  five twenty six years old and then this book kind of is praised by especially the psychologists and and so on as the great work of history. i did not yet a young person and not fully exposed to everything in this book often he does recognise this islamist by an islamist tendency in fact mentions the hobbies by name and seems to be aware a little bit about what's going on- and yet he would kind of give them cover as the indian patriots cetera - not even once inquiring what was the motive what what were they fighting for. 

last week chairman of a minorities commission islam khan put out a message on the social media. the message was largely addressed to the global muslim fraternity but especially to the arab muslims he had three main points. in the message first he reminded the us how much sacrifices indian muslims have done for the muslim fraternity. second he mentioned a few indian muslim scholars who had gone on to become i think what he said household names in the muslim world globally. and thirdly he reminded the hindus or is it the gods or something like that that's so far indian muslims have not complained to the arabs and should they do so the hindus of india should be prepared to face the arab lunch for reactions. 

so dr khan is absolutely right on the first - indian muslims throughout the centuries have significantly contributed to the global muslim fraternity. so the chronicles in piracy and arabic right from thirteenth century onwards abundantly informers how much flow of funds from india used to be sent through and the rest of the muslim world from india by the sultan's and other muslim kings. of course that money was not sent by the indian muslims out of their own earnings largely the revenue collected from vastly hindu population. the chronicles also tell us how rich yeah the preference is used to be given to the employment to the muslims from arabia iran and turkey central asia and elsewhere in preference over rest of the indians. and chronicles also mention for example i make very mentions how the ships loaded with gifts when they used to reach or the ports in arabia there used to be almost like street riots very. recently even less than within the last one century we can notice how during the killer for education - it was largely indian muslims who are concerned about the preservation and protection of a class the islamic state and it was largely indian muslims who for example funded the construction of the railway in Hejaz which is the biggest province of just about less than a hundred years back.  In fact one of the indian muslims used to be the moving force behind global collection of funds from the indian muslim donations for that project, and in fact throughout the recent history one hundred or two hundred years there is ample evidence to show how indian muslims have been concerned for the for for the summer. in recent times we've seen how indian muslims have been move to streets for years or chinese muslims or other such issues did they seem to be concerned often more about two months then the local issues with in india perhaps. so he's right. 

but more importantly he mentions a few names in his message which i thought was directly related to our topic of conversation. so he mentioned Shah Waliullah Dehlawi we he mentioned equal nike and a linear we have already seen we have already mentioned in this talk before how a linear and both great scholars had been carrier of several decades they have been given the missionaries and infect not many people might know so might be important to inform that doctors are full islam khan himself is the son of montana i do not know whether he himself has been a lot but his father has been connected with the big moment for several decades in fact one of the most popular books about the bleak has been authored by and so is so is custom. a linear who also as mentioned earlier written a book on the bleak movement and especially very well acknowledged biography on the founder of the week smaller areas. 

but the most important name of all these is that of of course shah Waliullah. learn and perhaps it should be it should be important for us to pause for a moment and understand the work of shock value because his ideology and his thought process is the groundwork on which job and the movement and the bleak comment actually stand so shall you love happened at the beginning of eighteenth century. he was born eighteen or three years seventeen or two right at the beginning of the crumbling of a mogul empire so still alive but very soon after death the sliding off for power of a mogul should start and that's when you happened in islamic tradition and terminology. you can you can save a reformer who happens once in a hundred years. so it's the role of major did to realize the practices of islam the practices of islam to make them true to the spirit of islam as the reached by the prophets and practice by his initial followers. now by this world let's make no mistake in context of islam reform really just means kind of free booting little bit rejecting any innovations in the religious ritual practices that might have crept in rearranging islamic interest considering the socio political economical situations that might be prevailing at that time, and overall bringing islam back to the progress - path of progress. that's the meaning of reform really. not foundation and fundamentally altering islam itself so that's that's not reform in context you might say more of a revival then reform. was that did who did that for i'm in india. no is very closely related with the shah will you learn in fact several of the mothers hours and mosques that the controls are named after and in the literature much respected so it's important for us to understand as i it does work at. best way to do that is a couple of books written by professor but first is muslim revival movements in northern india in which he throws light about the ideological groundwork before have happened - his predecessors and the second book is you and his times where he goes in depth in detail analyzing shock value does work happened at a time when islamic power in india was going through a great downwards already moguls were crumbling islamic state anyway in india had been divided into multiple powers, there were regional i'm muslim that was just emerging some of them are actually here so. the prime minister of the later moguls of that time he was a sheer himself luck know our became a center of years and there were several other nobles in power as well which was very concerning to shovel you know on one hand. and on the other marAThas has continuously on the rise so by the time will you love was a teenager he had already seen islamic power politically shrinking very quickly and in religious sphere also the power perhaps was challenged on one hand by each year on the other lot of goofy kind of influences but creeping in. so sharp he he wrote several letters pamphlets he was very active used to communicate with with the muslim kings not only with the groom mogul empire namesake mogul empire emperor but also several other muslim king such as miss our moon moon hyderabad used; to write letters to several nobles to insulin which people all over india not only in india worldwide. and in fact it's interesting to know that his most of the work is not not in as later but actually in arabic and persian considering that he his reach was global and he was communicating with the ummah. also just like doctor islam khan mentioned reaching out to the global ummah for the interest of indian muslims he infected did actually communicate not only with the sleeper but also it was the shovel you learn who practically invited the fourth invasion of the runny or a from afghanistan. so the letters  and pamphlets are written by evil you are recorded and you can see how fundamentalist the ideology that later would occupy the space was so he openly called all the muslim kings to invade non muslims suppress i'm violently if required but definitely through the machine of the state open celebration of hindu festivals like holy. in his letters he says in all the towns in which muslims have control maybe no such a display of hindu festivals. let there be no bathing in bangor et cetera also for she has he says that the more ram let them not you know do the professions especially tampa kind of ritual criticism of the first three as before early exit row so he says all of that. 


but there is very important fact which most people most historians have missed out including professor is we great work on on even professor is we does not notice the correspondence - correspondence not literary correspondence not written correspondence but actual physical correspondence he has - with wahab of arabia as most of you would have heard this name the forefathers of this so called a hobby islam that took root at the same time in arabia the correspondence between the hub and will you learn is generally missed out so let's mention that here both will you end a half exact contemporaries not only were the exact contemporaries - they were both born in the same year as a matter of fact. they might have even met in arabia. so if we study the biographies of both side by side - we realize that both were in the same city of madinah in the same year in their early twenties- studying under the same teacher mohammed sheik mohammad cindy. so it's very interesting which which fact this fact too many people have not paid attention to and if you notice both hub in arabia and will you learn in india they both studied as i said under this shake muhammad. and sheik mohammad himself interestingly head the two different streams of six jurisprudence of islam merging into him. so hobbies are and durban these you learn ideology they are unofficial and this smaller know who both and will you learn studied from he was both on a fee and anabolic he was conceived but but significantly influenced by an ideology so we see the coming together of this indian islam durban the slum which became later and a hobby eulogy in saudi arabia and it was not so the bags and of course coming together. which again you would see coming together in in afghanistan two centuries later in our own times when hulk either which follows a hobby see ideology and mullah owner the caliber and who do gandhi the end and a hobby coming together in action in afghanistan in our own time that we have seen anyways 

coming back to travel so shovel you love was very alarmed naturally seeing the political power of islam slide oh and by the time he died in fact the entire political power of sperm muslims in india had almost wiped out. so the hindu led by the marAThas had occupied almost three foot territory of india. despite i'm a channel daily incursions it infects up there is beyond our topic to talk about the influence that had politically but irrespective of despite that market has only went from place to place of strength and as there was a famous saying that from attack to cuTTak. attack in northwestern punjab on the borders to afghanistan lots of frontiers and in east to cut in bengal borders attack attack there was saffron flag in a letter written by rubber through the paperwork written from the attack itself he describes how many authors have captured all the important force in the north west how they have plans to expel whatever remaining seats of political military power the moguls or to run in the northwest exit row delhi itself moguls had become just a puppet of us. very powerful chart kingdom come up it was still fledgling but very wealthy and powerful in nepal under fifteen are very strong gore come up in the himalayan areas in all of india kashmir was again read up on six had emerged just just about as close of that century very powerful empire was coming up already six had become independent but a full fledged kingdom about to happen and as a result of course will you love was shot in his own lifetime despite all the letters and pamphlets not much was achieved but he did pave the ideological platform on which the ideology which later would become durban was created to. 

his own son he continued the work cause his father and there were several several disciples continuing this i'd eulogy hardcore so nice that spread all over india but it was not until his own disciple jesus disciple so yeah the railway his name is say but alien who is also known as the years i'm sure he'd and we shall soon come to why he's called shaky but this year we he's the true i would say ideological in a practical way ideological grandfather of the job and the ideology. 

so as i said end of eighteenth century beginning of nineteenth century islam was in so much crisis in india not only because of political situation but even in the religious faith hindus were showing quite a revival culturally spiritually there were few can the cultural literary and spiritual fear of the time you can clearly see there were a lot of revival happening thanks to the political for urge that was apparently coming so the result of that was again looking inward so right from shah will you learn and the railway her reaction was to become far more fundamentalist the traditional slims in india who were kind of becoming somewhat somewhat you could lose in following the pristine way of islam et cetera there were literary and cultural in reality to some extent as you could see from hyderabad no luck knows the culture of that time that was very alarming so sure as representative of the time but living she trained several very hard core almost like a hobby disciples in several cities of india he himself first of all from his original was as as as multiple biographies say was perhaps a soldier of booty worked with it pinned daddy issue daddy kane and so he he was plundered and i used to go with the mercenary army of america and he and his brother eventually you'd come back on become a teacher and spiritual religious awakening would happen and you'd become such a hard core fundamentalist sometimes i a blog about one story again which not many people have noticed which is about one thing of job so the then head of the nurses someone was murdered actually buy conspiracies by the same pre the urban these especially our american and mother and their followers but that that digress too far. 

anyways again remember a year with a lot of reverence is called dish he'd say he'd because he had given a call of jihad against the empire and not only given a call of jihad took a lot of indian muslims to afghanistan himself. he was in the earlier part of his life the soldier so he was a commander as well and he led armed jihad against marijuana thing but long story short the six made a small job of his jihad. he was quickly quickly killed in the battle - interestingly in bala court so it's the same ballot go to town of court indian armed forces back at them oh called a surgical strike. the same bowler court where this year dammit but we also called the shaky yeah he was killed. and then of course europeans were the emerging power british not only in india but in almost the entire muslim world displace them from power. so naturally the muslims especially of this kind looking at the situation as a huge crisis of faith. and eighteen fifty seven subsequently was from their perspective a jihAd- which i alluded to earlier that other historians such as the worker and many others have not paid so much attention to that angle that the allied with foods is merely as a fellow traveler but their goal was very clear it was a jihad to re establish islamic power politically so that islam again can be further interest of islam can be further in religious life as well. 

so anyways if you quit at this juncture first is about the name of the year people often confuse him to be related with the veil we set of needs oh it's important to mention that he has hardly anything to do with the railways. if anything he could be said to be an exact opponent of the v ideology yeah. that is what would later become the open the he has little to do with the railways and planners make it a point to mention that it's a misnomer to call a year but because he was not from the town of bailey but really both being an entrepreneur age but quite a distance apart from each other. 

that's the first point second is it's perhaps are not worthy to mention that when travel to mecca he was accompanied by more than five shit load of his followers many of these along with year that stayed in arabia for quite a while sometimes suffer more than couple of years and to their proper hobby ideology got influenced by by the director disciples of . and when they returned to india they properly radical the atmosphere so the atmosphere all over india but especially in the north india. couple of names perhaps worth mentioning include more than a sharia to learn of bengal who was of course follower of year and upon his return he and his son preach day quite have a hobby kind of a sunny i'd eulogy in bengal you could call it a slightly diluted form of adjusted to india but still pretty radical. another bengali actually worth mentioning is t to meet who the marxist historians of and dress up as a great freedom fighter deflector but this thirty two nice person he from his background was a one strongman of locals reminders in bengal and then he took up a job with some minor mogul and with that person he went to mecca he was living there already learning and that is when he met in arabia but we got influenced by him accepted him as is a teacher. he returned to bengal - he did a lot of very radical stuff including an armed jihad in that operation he got killed by by the british. in fact in the same year when the six in bala court killed his master year at the same time he was killed by british in bengal. to me it's also just like you to learn son to carry forward his father's mission of radical rising and rising you could say the knees of india in this case of bengal fifty two minutes footprint just like that of his master can be seen quite significantly in what would later become the headlining for muslims of india later on but third point to mention here is why does it concern the top leagues beyond the ideological aspect and it should not be missed that the founder of the jammer montana we actually is related directly with the names of people that i mention the biography of his written by a linear of luck know he clearly traces the genealogy of madonna years and it seems the maternal grandfather of modern years whose name was madonna montana was a director disciple of important in fact principle disciple of for the son of vanilla. so his name was muhammad shark and the sharks disciple is the grandfather of four as founder not only that another ancestor of modern until we he was a direct disciple of and they're not only apologies after his death he took a the ritual ritual declaration of loyalty took dates with them well you just wanted to mention that the event by genealogy and by this ancestry the founders are directly connected with all these personalities responsible for bringing the hardcore a hobby or near the ideology to india think it from arabia 


and the last thing and very important thing to mention here is what professor but interestingly mention. so in this book that i keep referring to well you learn and his times he at one place very clearly mentions that efforts were a foot in his own time in times of professor by other academic science to kind of whitewash and in a way hide some of these non palatable ideological moorings of the personalities like like a shovel you learn so i wanted to quote one part of what he writes in fact he mentions this thing not only in this book you learned his times but in another which can be called a sequel of the same book which is about his son so in both he mentions something similar so i could from shah will you learn and his times he says in the text this army puts on aesthetics and in the footnotes right followed by a few dots and does not say anything further the present author here was referring to himself has always been puzzled by this omission. but the coalition of nice a nice text with the microfilm of the ram manuscript suggests that my huston might have been available in the manuscript but was deliberately omitted in order to make the letter compatible with cosmopolitan and modern image of travelling and professor is we goes on to quote verbatim the persian part of that my hushed whisper it says - strict orders should be issued in all islamic towns forbidding religious ceremonies publicly practice by infidels such as the performance of holy ritual ritual bathing in the manga. on the tenth of more ram as should not be allowed to go beyond the bounds of moderation. neither should they be rude not repeat stupid things in the streets or bazaar. there are significant gaps in the text of other letters published by nasa me and comparison of these letters with the ram per copy indicates annoying or missions thus undermining the utility of this edition. 

so it's very important to mention although not directly connected with the topic at hand but in the passing be some other time we can we can talk more about it here is a professor of good muslim university itself principal student of another great scholar of illegal muslim university professor mohammad be writing in nineteen fifties early nineteen sixties openly saying how the very clear separation mission of even the direct source material was going on and he suspects going on to present an image of these events and personalities which suited the narrative of a more modernist secular wrist image of this is my migration project, we can see later on has had only become amplified as time passed and of course the human development minister a us were at the helm of affairs and it may not be out of the place to mention that himself leading light of jamie a million slum year was a career all his life this professor by the way went on to have a great career not only at the good muslim university so much so that there is a school within a mew that is named after professor nice me but also he was picked up by the congress party to lead the diplomatic mission of indian government so he retired as a career diplomat after having spent i think three decades or more in the league admissions university as a historian 

but anyway let's stray too far and we should just be thankful to honest upright historian like a professor say that we who shed light discovered edited and published original sources in see a big turkish for common public such as ourselves            


oh in the unnecessarily lengthy and perhaps laborious conversation last week we started talking about the so called secret history of the let us continue from where we left during the two thousand and fourteen election rallies not the prime minister back then in one of the rail is recited would do. the lines went like this a jazzy alumni him who are the amalgamated corner yeah amanda would do in brief it means that order armada of islam that sailed from arabia are doing no hesitation from any fear which was neither slowed down by the persian gulf stopped by the red sea who's in you reach every corner of the earth and which crossed all the seven oceans that same navy of islam when it reached the banks of gander here it's drowned. so in that really that these lines are talking about the unsuccessful expedition of alexander to india but in reality these lines are about the failure of islam when it comes to india - written in late eighteen seven hundred and perhaps it in seventy nine by madonna for the task assigned a friend of the year illegal movement. it's part of a much larger work whose title is just raise the flow and ebb of islam or rise and fall of islam in this won't work politically narrator how islam conquered this great country of india and yet could not sustain it could not succeed in middle of the hindus. now this poem truly is a representative piece of literature from eighteen seven hundred it stands for the great disappointment of the islamist mind in that time. disappointing naturally because thinking from an islamic in the game that thought process that ideology which apparently concurred every land it went to it matched victorious in central asia in africa on the frontiers of europe indeed as the poem says symbolically crossed all the seven seas in fact it ruled vast portions of multiple centuries several centuries and yet it could not over and like it had the other countries 

also just like it had when lost politically or on the battlefield
 such as against the mongols slam head even then managed to convert the conqueror and therefore in the end it was islam that one what did achieve in after ruling it for several centuries and that disappointment was perhaps further accentuate it by more than a century of continuous failures in the jihad against the coffees starting from seven hundred and fifty is also the field against the the field against the charts than the field against the six hundred and fifty seven the field against even the british. so the dust settled on that failed jihad of eighteen fifty seven mind indeed just like this poem or similar he represents would have been greatly disappointed. and that disappointment we can see rising into perhaps three or four distinct categories of reaction inter related connected and still somewhat different directions 
 
 so we can eliminate them in three or four categories a as a seed and first of those would be what i call small scaling of jihad. after having failed on the battlefields several times perhaps time was to change the tactics and we see that starting with the seventies and continuing throughout the eighteen hundreds in fact well into the nineteen hundreds a series of assassinations lot of gorilla kind of activities and lot of street violence riots if we study the reports of eighteen hundreds we see that there was in in in in riots caused by the muslims and of course history of the rights is far older than that and still we notice that with eighteen fifties sixties seventies the intensity and the widespread nature of rights is particularly noteworthy assassinations and they said there were several high profile assassinations done by fanatical muslims so one hundred and seventy is the chief justice of india was murdered by your hobby another high profile murder was that of actually the viceroy of india the lord he got assassinated step to death in and demand by another  hobby his name was and then soon after that we see series of assassinations of particularly the leaders indeed a few years couple offered less than a couple of decades later the association of pundit who can say was kind of the successor of himself he was assassinated by a fanatical muslims. and then his own successors in a way and was also assassinated by another fanatical muslim few years later again. and this murderer of us army was in fact associate although he never never admitted to that just like the earlier be murderers also never admitted to being associated with those organisations so we see that was the first reaction as he said small killing of jihad if we cannot win on the battlefield we can win the streets we can do the assassinations and that that is one thread of reaction. 
 
 another reaction was from the elites of the indian muslim society the and especially the us while families who are employed and associated with the moguls and the other muslim ruling kingdoms and this group this reaction is best represented by the work of year illegal movement their reasoning their introspection was that muslims are losing because they haven't adopted to the murder introduced by the europeans - unlike the hindus who they are good the new education new tools. so they argued that for furthering the cause of islam in india muslim society should adopt the new means and methods new tools and technology they should collaborate with the british they should accept the english education is the new way and this group this reaction is often dressed up as the progressive within indian muslims but but just like is a freedom fighter and to need of bengal is a great revolutionary soldier and his associates progressive limits and scope of their progress was simply said adopting the new means and methods that never altered the mission of islam in which always remained supremacy. that however was the second major
   reaction. 
   
third was somewhat more religious and more inward looking so there is this a lower offer maddy in both and of islam and disney version of islam where much after the death of prophet muhammad and just before the day of diameter the day day of judgment would appear a great muslim leader redeem a of salt called ma'am so the koran does not talk about money but the mention him that he would match with the great huge army of islam would be joined by jesus christ would appear do a jihad against both the infidels on one hand and corrupt on the other and ultimately they would redeem the islam on earth so this appointment of eighteen hundreds we see pushed clements of to appear so of course much earlier also at the time of a and soon before there was other personality in who claimed to be in the and there was a sector of these later in a run from sheer perspective who also claim the same league but right at this juncture middle of eighteen hundreds and after founded by major he and his followers claim him to be the promise this whole thing was another reaction 

in the passing one quick comment during the recent debates about this us citizenship amendment act with the indian parliament brought to accelerate giving the indian citizenship to the persecuted minorities of pakistan bangladesh and afghanistan there was an argument made that if indeed persecution is the criteria then been under much persecution by the panic state of pakistan should also be offered the same facility now the folks who make that argument do not understand either the ideology of years the history more likely both if you studied their own speeches and writings have always been since the origin as fundamentalist if not more as the rest of this indeed the murder of pundit of our summers was by year a follower direct follower of for this major in fact the reason was because of entered intellectual debate with jugular he had countered by writing a book would do shooting the arguments of and all these debates resulted in this violence and didn't finish and later if you study literature they are so much against the cafes and so much fundamentalist that no sane person would claim them to be anything much different from the rest of the news for their internal cables which is not unique at all in their case she has calls nice car fares within nice call the bridge the call these calls all of them coffers but when it comes to the coffee coffee proper - non muslims all of them are eating with each other in more fundamentalism than the other so that's one side comment perhaps. 

one more side comment much attempted to make is that like the official sony names of pakistan declared and still and keep debating on ferociously fighting for the title to be a muslim contrast that with how it happens within the society where each sect most of them at least would claim to be as far away and removed and different from core of the society as they possibly can beat beat indeed the so many other sects dude you know especially the followers of us for me within the society would claim to be different if possible they would claim to be non hindus even so there's so many examples to contrast that situation with the muslims reach that to be more muslim than the other so centrifugal force which ever since exactly rivers in case of islam so that's a second quick side observation 

but anyways third that was the third reaction force reaction final reaction of that disappointment is far more profound and far reaching and ideological and that's why i kept it for the last and it's also what is most related most relevant to the topic at hand so the planners who were direct participants of the eighteen fifty seven jihad and ideological the torch bearers of shovel and a year i after the battle of eight hundred and fifty seven the introspective and and deliberated over what's wrong why is islam not being successful in i'll come to what success really means what is that criteria to define success in eyes of an islamist. but they reasoned and they argued that slim society perhaps is not prepared to work for the islamic state just right then we have been spending so much energy fighting jihad on the battlefields not being successful. so is it first of all worth spending so much energy on can we not achieve the same goals without having to directly focus on that jihad for establishing in an islamic state can we not achieve the same goals through other means such as grass root work after all finishing the islamic state is only a means to an end not an end in itself islamic state is meant to further islam to make this whole indian society islamic. can we not make the indian society islamic without having to depend on the islamic state that was one argument when reasoning 

and second why is indian muslim society not able to stand firm and really be successful for that their argument was that because indian society is not muslim enough because is truly doesn't seem like society which allow would like to help two putting it very crudely it has lot of nuances on both but these two became the central points of thinking that number one is it worth spending so much time and energy on jihad same energy why should we not lays into a grassroots effort to islam is the indian society from within and two proper muslim it is different from what indian muslims in general looks like and therefore something has to be done to convert the muslims to a proper muslim these two parts is what became the foremost deal but the mothers are very soon they said these others were direct participants of eighteen fifty seven and two of them noteworthy among among them were young madonna's named muhammad the military and and other montana a bull rush it go he we had mentioned go he in last week's conversation as the first teacher of the founder of the earth so these two more letters left to deal he went north words to tone they've banned on the banks of gander it's an old pilgrim town of those named dave brenda they've banned they founded the mother following the structure and a shape and ideology of a shovel you edit had come down to them - but giving it a curriculum and giving it a shape which would train muslim leaders for every city in india and soon became not just one mother within a decade or two - network of mothers as an entire north india with the next fifteen twenty years and then an entire year over the next thirty forty years. by the end of that century they had a couple of dozen very large mothers us so that's that's the fourth and final reaction which is what gilbert i mean two points off thinking one was that instead of jihad let's do the grass rooting for detailing of islam as asian project. the same agenda and program which is state would implement we can implement it from within the society itself and the second agenda which is make the muslims proper muslims it is what became public by the efforts of the primary student of congo he next head of job and i'm a mouth on her son we mention lasting disciple back then during the times when the smothers us but just progressing he was a young teenager and he became leader of taking that program and implementing it. 


at this point let us take a quick detour to understand the process of conversion to islam in that we're able to understand and see to it in that process the limitation of more than a highly aside that islam had failed in look at the situation from from the data and facts in nineteen forty one according to that census the number of muslims in the courts undivided india was about hundred million which was roughly one fourth of the entire p


 opulation which also was more muslims than all the arabs iranians and added together more muslims lived in india then in the so called places of islam of its birth and the initial success so therefore the disappointment of more than a highly can only be understood in a sense that islam failed to overrun india as it had done in iran and elsewhere and that the rate of conversion to islam in india had been pretty slow and still number one hundred million by nine hundred and forty one time is perhaps more than one third subcontinent at least officially is not a small number by any measure and therefore it is incumbent upon us to properly analyze and steady that process through which such a big mass of people came to become muslims. 
 
 so if we survey the historical literature on how did muslims came to be in india perhaps for answers that we get first and most established one naturally is that grand in one hand and sword in the other - invaders they conquered the portions of india which they became successful in the forced the population to convert - both as an immediate aftereffects of the war which means that the people captured were given a choice to convert or kill as well as later in the time of peace once the invader had become the king and established the sultan it rule of law - through a gradual process both force and inducement offering on applying pressure is on the non muslim population to convert. most of the times this process is very clearly visible throughout the history right from the thirteenth century down to perhaps nineteenth century in india. all the muslim chronicles and fact hindus accounts agree on that - that this was pretty evident process this was a pretty common occurrence and except for the denials refuse to believe the muslim writers and the writers of all the century except for them everybody else has a consensus that that was a process. so i would like to just one small portion from a professor mohammad be he translates work called which was written at the time of sultan and it was supposed to be state policy state policy of how to promote and preserve islam. therefore points given as a policy but the first point that is the first and foremost way in which you should or state should promote islam is this - record the kings should protect the religion of islam with sincere faith and kings will not be able to perform the duty of protecting the faith unless for the sake of god and the prophets creed the overthrow and uproot and coffee, shook and the worship of idols. but if the total uprooting of idolatry is not possible owing to the firm roots of and the large number of cars and the kings should at least strive to insult disgrace honor and defame the music an idol worshipping hindus - the worst enemies of god and the prophet. listen to this further the symptom of the kings being the protectors of religion is this when they see a hindu their eyes grow red and they wish to bury him alive. they also desire to completely uproot the brahmin who are the leaders of cooper and and to whom and shit spread and the commandments of are enforced. owing to the fear and terror of the kings of islam not a single enemy of allah and the prophet can drink water that is sweet or stretch his legs on his bed and go to sleep in peace. and then document at the court of proposing promoting the state policy of how to deal with the protection of islam promotion of islam. in fact a professor it goes onto say that he is mrs direct descendant soon after he would call his relatives and nephews and he would tell them about the internet and he would cry and weep and wail and say i'm not able to practice on this state policy because i'm not strong enough and then you'd say that there for other ways of serving but ultimately practice able or not this is simply one sample very small  sample from a huge set of literature available where muslim chronicles never hesitate to say that this was the policy in this should be the policy according to an islamist. 
 
 so in times of peace this policy was implemented in various means such as muslim criminal would be pardon if we accept islam or examine the officer who could not collect enough revenue has budgeted then unless you convert he killed or again promotions and carrier offers to those who convert to islam giving grants and the state benefits too village is the village converts to islam kind of use and means and mechanisms were continuously followed. and it may not we totally out of place we don't want to get too much in detail but look at the state of the secular government of india in whether it does not to some extent follow the same policy of promoting conversion away from hindus into on one hand on the other so that was more officially the policy even back then as it continues to some extent in the asymmetry of the benefits offered by the constitution and the governments in those words the others anyways that was the first theory first explanation of how big number of hindus converted potentially to islam 
 
 second that we often hear about is the so called sophie's who peaceful missionaries and spiritual leaders of islam greatly impressed by their spiritual powers in those in in truth come to them and convert that's the other theory that we hear about in reality however if we look at the original sources of themselves that does not seem to be true at all and i would refer to this great work by that we into called the history of sophie's in so in this again like i said last time we should be very grateful to these professors mohammad be and professor between these three they have so much of literature so much of obscure sources, so much of direct material which refute many of these false theories and beliefs. so i wanted to urban part of this professor writes in a history of sophie's in the first volume he quotes professor the role of both medieval mysticism and in the history of indian culture is often exaggerated beyond all proportions. whatever might have been the value of either as a distinct to phase of hinduism and islam from moral spiritual and philosophical points of views - historical importance is considerably limited by the fact that the number of indians directly affected by them at their heyday which was short lived could not be very large. the number dwindled very appreciate in the course of time and the orthodox religions showed no visible signs of being seriously affected by this sudden intrusion of radical elements. professor is we comes to the same conclusion as well supporting his conclusion by volumes of support material he says that the fingerprints of fees in the process of bringing non muslims to islam it is very minimal that's the second theory and even in our own time we see that the the fees have been successful in converting very small number of people. the famous cases of celebrities like that of musician few here and few there those cases are very small in number that's not the role of sources play an important role but not the role of converting to islam 
 
 but then the third theory that is offered by the literature is that of the migration of muslims from other places too came from arabia they already had the business contacts in india and as in arabia they became muslims they started spreading sometimes deliberately sometimes in admittedly islam to the communities they came in contact with and similarly another theory that is often heard is that large number of muslims from from central asia from turkey migrating to india all the elite class of indian muslims as they're known the so called high cost of muslims migrants from abroad and so on and so forth but again through his works into office workers especially noteworthy first is indian muslims who are they on the other one the legacy of muslim rule in a very very clearly supporting it with the enormous amount of evidences that population was minuscule school of course merchants should have married the local into women such as the case we see in kerala not only the merit the local hindu women for whatever reason the hindu kings allowed these muslim merchant to convert the fishermen and boatman community not only allowed apparently for whatever reason the king of killer promoted that conversion even - that might be true but it is a very small minuscule population of course in our time we see that the population of muslims coming from bangladesh for the ruling years or indeed even from pakistan itself might be significant to the changing demographics - which perhaps explains the intensity of protest against yeah and the steps taken by the government of india so there may be some truth to it but the chair of that factor in the largest muslim population of india that maybe very small again. 
 
 and then finally another theory which has been promoted in the last few decades definitely not more than hundred years perhaps is the theory of justice where and bunch village upon village of the so called oppressed casts of those they saw great opportunity in converting to islam and gaining social equality and justice we're all very familiar with that theory this theory is nothing but a bunch of concoction without any effect without any basis in history in fact all the muslim sources sometimes explicitly most of the times in implicitly kind of refute that theory but of late that has become a kind of favored explanation of the conversion even by the muslim or learners so if we hear the speeches of we have to several times he lays much stress on both the sophie and this conversion because the the lips wanted men from the oppressive society. but if we look at the literature for example says that's a unsuccessfully tried to convert to islam what is noteworthy that both survivor these only managed to convert hi the theory that the influence of and of islamic egalitarian is significant factors which led members of the hindu lower classes to embrace islam is unfounded. the muslim conquest did not unleash forces of liberation change the position of the exploited of the untouchables the social and economic position of the masses of muslim converts who accepted islam under a variety of pressure all of which have been analyzed by jeffrey he was in fact no better than that of hindus. so mackey is source which details this process of conversion and it illuminates the sources of those pressures you're the author is talking about what are those special and definitely this so called egalitarian or freedom from the so called social operation is not one of those so that's what professor says also noteworthy that predominantly. these missionaries focused actually and preferred to focus on converting the high cost so called high cost rather than the the list. another another easy way to understand why this theory is false is to see the large number of the lips that are present even today right in the heart of the muslim power of the medieval times in the vicinity of delhi and probation indeed there is a very large number of world population of hindus and therefore had this theory of egalitarian been true why are there such a large number of that that population within the fold this is patently wrong pedal i simply for the political agenda on one hand this operation of the society and on the other painting white washing the record of islam the egalitarian and harbinger of liberalism to so that's that's not true at all 
 
 now of all these explanations of conversion perhaps a synthesis of all these needs to be done it would appear the process of conversion at a very high level level looks like this the invader conqueror and subsequently the sultan would apply the pressures sometimes violent sometimes that of inducement to convert slim to islam. once that muslim had converted at least in the name sake when the sufi comes into picture he is not the one who opens the door truly to some but he is the one who then welcomes these converts and offers them so offers them and spiritual peace within the new religion that the convert has been forced to adopt. and then at one place professor is we mentions that it did sophie is more powerful than a living. i would worship and revere the local saint and kind of the same devotion of energy which they would have with their earlier deities would get transferred to the local in texas. practices which they had followed earlier in most cases dude to follow such as the gotra system such as the rules of not marrying cousins such as many communities professor case records would not even have the the circumcision this converts they would worship or the other but they would practically maintain dude traditional attire even the names would be regular names perhaps they would have at their home ceremonies that they're immediately previous generation followed for the marriage or for that they would continue to behave like their previous generations simply they have adopted an additional spiritual source in the larger penalty on the head that new source would be the local shrine of the local saint. and this this is very clearly seen in so many other cases that even successful or not tried to use it islam is one more at least in the missionary allah is offered as just qatar or such and such names which the hindus would be familiar already the literature especially popular literature throughout the medieval ages written in the exit row or indeed much in other local languages also a is just one more data truly in that larger pantheon of deities that the hindus might have that is what the would do in this stage and still at the end of that second process also these muslims should not be truly muslims as muslims are known for that exclusive eulogy of allah alone which is when the cars he the moron in where they would this pseudo muslim into proper muslim they would apply the pressures of expelling all those non islamic ideologies and thought processes and take this new convert into a proper islam as taught by the prophet and as practiced by his initial followers and yet this process was not so easy we see so many counter conversion so these converted muslims should go back there would be just namesake muslims so they would outwardly change their names and appearances but inwardly in their in their family they would continue to be as steadfast as you could practically can i've seen in recent times several cases coming forward such as the famous a family of musicians in west bengal whose name was kane for several generations and he openly came out and said i'm not a muslim anymore actually we were never muslim we used this surname simply too owner whatever titles were given to us but there are several examples where so small kinks et cetera would convert four namesake to avoid some punishment to win some court case et cetera and they would adopt slam but not follow it dude continue to follow one hundred per cent at least inwardly their ancestral and then we also see several examples of very prominent going back see on their own so was the parents who had recently converted to islam as part of the large conversion and i think at the time so represents as nicely explained by a child in his landmark work he represents that counter conversion process and using that word crudely he explains it in a much nicer and much but at a very crude and high level - represents that going back to the roots covering the roots of his grandparents and going back where they had come from. and there are several such examples where and were kind of giving spiritual police to this new convert then there were so many personalities beat beat so many other saints especially in the back tradition who would bring them back to the traditional food and it was silently done this this work there are several examples much before you start to do that in time so this at this who then transforms this pseudo proper muslim league and at this point we should understand what the bleak truly means in the islamic terminology so these three words bleak and these are often used to explain this process of becoming a muslim by muslims themselves. is this stage one literally means invitation word comes from this word in arabic is an invitation to islam the second step is one invitation to islam is given and let's say accepted and somebody becomes a muslim for namesake, then comes the league means preaching in a way now that this is a new muslim taking him and making improper muslim by telling him about how the numbers performed how what is the deeper meaning of this declaration of faith et cetera - basic practice of islam and making him do that practice. that is advice of the teaching of that and then the third step is islam slice transformation or a total change once he is now a practicing muslim then he is to go deeper and become full muslim in the mold of prophet and his followers that final radical asian final step of conversion is islam 
 
 now at the time of turn of the last century early nineteen hundreds as i mentioned islam had lost the political power and therefore the third step where cars supported by the state were able to convert properly the new convert into a practicing muslim that power was weekend on one hand and on the other led by not only are so much but several other actors but definitely most visible in case of there was this up see happening where most of the times even voluntarily people would go back or want to go back to their insist on religion and with agency or far which had actually started in the time of the island itself that then on the himself perhaps in eighteen in seventy eight some some somewhere in that a decade - converted a prominent muslim back to the hindu fold and then if we study the literature of a pundit lake and after that and in fact there are so many other leaders some of them actually had converted from islam back to the fold and they were very well learned in the theology of islam carries who had dick run by heard of them were so i'm forgetting the names but some of these especially in punjab and were muslims converted to islam and just like in our time we see doing that giving speeches and the same debates they used to be so many of this work going on in late eighteen hundreds early nineteen hundreds and through these debates they call and then they themselves because they're very well read and large themselves dude dude dude as for breakfast lunch and dinner. we see that happening islamic society the elites the rough somewhat scared for the first time they saw that we lost the political power we lost all the battles in jihad and now we're losing these new converts as well and that is when truly in this form comes in play. 
 
 we can see this in several evidence as i am not sure enough scholarly work has been done on studying this counter conversion process in without any political template but for sure we can see that the principal states where muslim rulers were ruling dude order criminal punishments for a muslim who converted back to hinduism of course in proper sharia the punishment for that is that but even in early nineteen hundreds in india we see such as the great grandmother of the bollywood actor the day she ordered a jury the issued an order in perhaps one hundred and fourteen or so that any muslim state to any other religion should be liable for punishment varying degrees same thing can be seen in other muslim states as well which shows that are awesome c program was successful and some of these converts are willingly didn't even require much effort they were simply namesake muslims and they saw no reason to remain muslim anymore dude be happy to go back to the religion of their ancestors i want to mention one more side comment not much related but recently just a couple of weeks back last week this news came from where an entire village of muslims that is traditionally so much related with the music in the profession marriages later they became muslims and recently in arizona they converted back reverted back to the ancestral religion it became much highlighted news so this more or less exactly hundred years back was happening at a much larger scale far more widespread and that therefore became much sorts of a crisis for the muslim elite of india the high cost muslims to the disciple of the founder of the mothers and also of the great great field they're disciple he accidentally found himself in middle of the situation we're in this district of there news which is a large number of one that had become under duress muslim several centuries back she came across them and she started this program of the league so i won't go into too much detail of nit gritty is because those are already published in the recent articles that have appeared in the media but bottom line was he came up with this program which became really successful from their perspective and it was very simple also a team of muslim missionaries would go to a village or another away from their native place team of maybe five or ten muslims dude live there anymore and every day they would go on a tour which they called they would knock at the doors of the muslim families don't  ask them to come to the mosque in the evening and also they would give them some very simple messages such as how to do what is the meaning of colour and then when local muslims had gathered in the mosque there would be delivery of a inspirational speech the call on that speech should focus on very simple issues there is no jihad preach they're very simple issues of how to be a better muslim what does it mean to be muslim and it's a very simple curriculum very simple messaging which this semi educated not a learned man be able to adopt and one of the things which the speaker would hurt his audience to do is to join them in this program and go to some other place and do the same that serves two purposes first of all that's how they recruit the new the biggies so if out of the audience of hundred people even if one person volunteers to join them he is asked to perhaps the three days in a month to the program of the bleak and then this new team that he will join will give him an opportunity not to lead to do this missionary work and therefore added to the ranks of the bleak but on the other hand also give him exposure to live like like a true muslim it's more like a training practically of how the muhammad lived and therefore we should live and for that they have very fundamental very small simple things such as sleep on the side not on that side because the profits slept on one side of his bed but you also should sleep like that which led should come out of the mosque first or out of the bathroom first all of those very simple fundamental things and they make this new new follower of the league also practice this way they said they of course increase the following of the league who then becomes the agent of change within his local community he would them influence other muslims and typically they focus on younger folks who might not even been a job who might have finished college or might be  finishing college who might have ample opportunity time and freedom so that they can do this job of a missionary activity and then another very far reaching think with this model does they take them to the centers of the top leagues which are no of course all over the word butter such as the global headquarters in delhi they call centers are smokers and there they have annual functions for several days three or four days our grand huge gatherings tens of thousands of people gather from all over the word. and for them and integration with the so slowly slowly it as we have seen it had disconnected anyway them from the local community they lived in them from the practices and the cultural identity the sense of dressing et cetera et cetera of the local community that they were living with an integrating them with the global muslim community gradually and slowly. consciousness that i belong to this local saint my devotion for this shrine slowly goes away and i belong to a global brotherhood of islam comes in integrate them from local islamic group which is not released and him into the global islam a rumour another very important and impact full thing that the as discovered
 
 and then in politics i think you to head for the conclusion but a couple of points to make often we have been told that does not involve itself in politics it keeps aloof and it may sound true enough the couple themselves from politics and yet important to note that a lot of actors of important political positions we already mentioned it doctors are and the president of india several politicians of pakistan india and bangladesh public is similarly lot of terrorists had been doubly geez because of course this organization is very fluid you don't become a member of you went on public tours you did attend the conference is that their markers you remained attached for several years but you're free to do whatever you  you you're doing you're not a full timer anyway noteworthy amongst those would be prime accused in the goo thirteen burning case for example also the conspirators of the murder of rain per year the home minister of gujarat was very senior leader but above all that is not the role of those are incidental effects of the league for sure as that engine which converts the i'm a convert muslims into a proper muslim which also integrate the local muslim communities disconnected from their neighbours but connected to the global therefore serves a great political purpose without having to directly do day to day politics so that's the history of the earth i think this is the point where i should apologize for making this unnecessarily long and i should also thank you for your patience and i should stop this atrocity at this time thank you so much survey survey surveillance and efficiency oh       yeah yeah yeah yeah    al and and